






§Plt 







nMUIW m WI9 

Windows 95/98/NT 



; - . ’ v . \ ' v 

e Yp ^$11* ’ te.o^ Tv - ‘ v ^ Y v V "\ 



pp 



H^lslv 



~Y I I 

'fV&S** *1 ^ V- V?nT '^ v V v\‘ 

Ipg '-A 

laiiPiitt 

I i ^ fei 

(fes® - 8 

• ^-.y; $ :* ^ViJsbsr S4^»i— 

PAP'Ppfe-%i 






JT%p^ 

Mp 

n 1 1 1 1 

' ,• v v\ N ^j\^;^X;sV\Nv 



M|l| 




iSlS 










Audio Tools 
for 

Nintendo«64 and Game Boy® 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



1 



08/25/99 



D.C.N. N OA-06-8207-00 1 REV A 



“Confidential” 

This document contains confidential and 
proprietary information of FACTOR 5 LLC and 
Nintendo of America Inc. and is also protected 
under the copyright laws of the United States and 
foreign countries. No part of this document may 
be released, distributed, transmitted or 
reproduced in any form or by any electronic or 
mechanical means, including information storage 
and retrieval systems, without permission in 
writing from Nintendo. 

© 1999 FACTOR 5 LLC 



Printed and distributed by Nintendo of America 
Inc., August, 1999 



MusyX, and Factor5 are registered trademarks of 
Factor 5, LLC. 

Nintendo, Game Boy, and N64 are registered 
trademarks of Nintendo of America Inc. 

Dolby is a registered trademark of Dolby 
Laboratories, Inc. 



08/25/99 



2 






Introduction 



Introduction 



Sequenced vs. Streaming 

In an age of gigabyte sized multimedia applications, memory is no longer 
the limiting factor it once was. Streamed audio has become a de facto 
standard for most games and multimedia applications. It seems to 
overcome the limited possibilities associated with sequenced sound and, 
from the perspective of the musician, it allows studio quality productions to 
be used for the first time. There really seems to be no reason why one 
should even consider using sequenced sounds instead of digital audio 
streams. 

The developers of MusyVi. have been working in the games industry since 
the 80’s and therefore experienced the shift from sequenced sound to 
streamed audio first hand. At first glance streamed audio is tempting, but 
there are some major drawbacks. 

• Even on CDs, memory is not totally unlimited. 650 MB seems to be a 
lot of memory, but even when using ADPCM compressed audio you 
cannot get more than 4 hours worth of audio data on a single CD. 
Take into consideration that program and graphics data need to be 
stored somewhere, too. 

• Since a CD is not always the most reliable type of media, huge data 
buffers in memory are needed to assure that no breakups in the 
audio stream occur. 

• Streamed audio can hardly be called truly interactive, since locating 
different places on a CD, when looking for specific data, results in 
delays. 

• Crossfading between multiple pieces of music is almost impossible 
without major programming effort. 

• Accessing a CD-Drive causes major slowdowns in game applications 
on most systems. 

• There are still cartridge-based platforms out there, where streaming 
audio is not an option. 

Since today’s games more and more resemble little movies with a quality 
you would expect from big screen films, having fast, interactive sound is 
crucial for a smooth, real-time playing experience. The score has to react 
to the action when it takes place, without delay. 

It therefore does not make much sense to use streamed audio, the 
disadvantage of which is obvious: Noticeable delays, when it is supposed 
to react instantly to sudden shifts in the action, which disturbs the smooth 
progression of the game play. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 

3 



08/25/99 



MusyJi Audio Tools 



The Advantages of MusyX for Musicians 

MusyX is designed to be used like any normal synthesizer during 
development. The only difference is that a Windows application is used to 
edit all the parameters of the synthesizer. 

All the musician needs is a standard keyboard and the sequencer of his 
choice. A slave program running either on the same, or a separate 
computer, represents the MIDI synthesizer he would normally use, and 
emulates the sound of the target system. 

MusyX actually gives the musician greater freedom because sounds are 
not predetermined and fixed, like in a normal General MIDI synthesizer. 
Therefore he can create his own sounds, use his own samples or 
rearrange the sounds he wants to use. 

MusyX works with 

Keymaps and layers to build complex sounds and sound sets 
SoundMacros to create truly unique sounds 

while a convenient grouping arrangement allows the musician to manage 
songs and sound effects effectively. 

Sequenced sound does not need to sound sterile or artificial. With MusyX 
the musician has the power and necessary control to create vibrant, 
original sound with the greatest possible ease. 

Screen Credits 

All developers who incorporate the MusyX audio system into their game 
are required to make their best efforts to display a screen credit on the 
opening licensing screen, which states the following. 

" MusyX Audio Tools Licensed by Factor 5" 

Using Dolby Surround Logo 

A developer may become a Dolby Surround Licensee, free of charge. This 
grants the right to use the Dolby Surround Logo. To become a Dolby 
Surround Licensee, four basic criteria need to be met. 

1 The developer must use a Dolby-approved Phase Positioner, such as 
MusyX, or other Dolby-approved real-time encoding scheme for 
positioning sound effects that are triggered in real-time. 

2 If the game includes linear audio, the developer must use a Dolby- 
approved Surround facility to encode linear audio. 



08 / 25/99 



4 





Introduction 



3 The developer must sign and complete a Dolby Surround Trademark 
Agreement which grants a license to use the Dolby Surround 
trademark, subject to these conditions. 

4 The developer must send a sample of the finished title at or prior to the 
time of release. 

For more information on becoming a Surround licensee, please contact 
Dolby directly: 

Dolby Laboratories, Inc. 

100 Potrero Avenue 

San Francisco, CA 94103-4813 

Tel: (415) 558-0200 

Fax: (415) 863-1373 

Email: multimedia@dolby.com 



© 1 999 Factor 5 LLC 



5 



08/25/99 



Table of Contents 



Table of Contents 

Introduction 3 

Sequenced vs. Streaming 3 

The Advantages of MusyX for Musicians 4 

Screen Credits 4 

Using Dolby Surround Logo 4 

Working with Musy^X 1 1 

SoundMacros 1 1 

Macrolanguage vs. Parameter Setup 12 

Layers and Keymaps 12 

Groups- Organizing Data 14 

Dynamic Voice Allocation 14 

Game Applications 1 5 

Data Conversion 15 

The Installation Process 17 

Hardware Setup.. 17 

Installing MusyX on Nintendo 64 19 

System Requirements for Dual System Setup 21 

Installing MusyX on Game Boy 24 

System Requirements for Dual System Setup 26 

MIDI Loopback Devices 28 

Changing General Settings 29 

Software Start-up Routine 31 

Overview....... 33 

How MusyX Works 33 

SoundMacros and the SoundMacro Editor...... 35 

General 35 

Creating a SoundMacro 36 

Creating SoundMacros by Using Templates 37 

Editing SoundMacros 37 

The Command Pool 38 

Editing Values 39 

Loops and Jumps in SMaL 40 

Calling other SoundMacros in SMaL 40 

Keymaps and Layers...... 41 

General 41 

Keymaps 42 

Layers 44 



©1999 Factors LLC 08/25/99 

7 



MusyJ,. Audio Tools 



The Sound Editor....... 49 

What is a Sound? ...49 

Defining Sounds and Import/Export 49 

The Sound Object Properties Window 51 

The Search Window 53 

Organizing Data 55 

General 55 

Managing Groups 59 

SongGroups and Their Parameters 60 

SFXgroups and Their Parameters 62 

Testing Sound Effects 63 

Managing the Object Pool 65 

Adding Samples 65 

The Different Parts of a Project.. 66 

How the Structure Relates to the Actual Game Data 67 

Transferring Data Between Projects 67 

The Project Manager 69 

General 69 

Project Manager Menus .70 

Walk Through 75 

General 75 

Start the Soundslave 76 

Launch the MusyX Editor 76 

Creating a New Project. 77 

The Project Window..... 79 

Adding Samples 80 

A Very Simple SoundMacro (SMaL Program) 81 

Defining a SongGroup ..83 

Playing the Instrument for the First Time 85 

Recording a Sequence 86 

Looped Midi-files 87 

Defining a Sound Effect 88 

How to Test a Sound Effect 89 

Saving Your Work 89 

Finish! 89 

Additional Tools 91 

The Table Editor 91 

Using the Table Editor 91 

Using the ADSR Envelope Editor 92 



08 / 25/99 



8 






Table of Contents 



The MIDI Setup Window „. 93 

What is the Purpose of this Window? 93 

How to Use the Window in Everyday Work 93 

The Importance of the Window when Exporting Data 93 

Using Multiple MIDI Setups within One SongGroup 94 

The Virtual MIDI Keyboard 95 

Why a Virtual Keyboard? 95 

Using the Keyboard 95 

Testing Sound Effects 96 

Limitations in Comparison to a Real Keyboard 96 

The Network Master Window 97 

What can be Controlled Using this Window? 97 

What Kind of Information is Displayed? 97 

Data Conversion 99 

General 99 

What the Musician has to do to Prepare the Data 100 

The Actual Data Conversion 101 

The Description File 103 

MusyX Sample Program for N64 106 

Appendix 1 - N64 Musicians Reference 107 

Appendix 2 - Game Boy Musicians Reference 177 

Appendix 3 - N64 Programmers Reference. 255 

Appendix 4 - Game Boy Programmers Reference 345 

Appendix 5 - Slave Reverb Control (N64) 385 

MINI-M.O.R.T ....391 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

9 



Working with MusyX 



Working with Musfl € 



SoundMacros 

The element that makes MusyX so powerful is the SoundMacro. 

SoundMacros are basically small and simple programs used to define 
both instruments and sound effects within MusyX. SoundMacros are 
created using a customized programming language called SMaL (Sound 
Macro Language). 

Each line of the SoundMacro program constitutes a single MacroStep 
command, most of which are executed sequentially and define various 
attributes of the sound. Other commands control the flow of the program 
and make it possible to create loops or conditional jumps in the program. 

Something every musician wants to be able to do is to create full, complex 
sounds with minimal effort, which cannot be achieved by using a static set 
of parameters. MusyX on the other hand offers a dynamic algorithm and 
allows the musician to do just that. SoundMacros offer all necessary 
means to gradually influence sounds as they move forward in time. 

A great advantage of SMaL programs is their simplicity. It is not necessary 
to be a professional programmer in order to design a SMaL program. This 
programming language is easy to learn. It is therefore easy to quickly gain 
maximum control over the generated sounds. 

To make working with MusyX even easier, it comes with library features 
like predefined SoundMacro programs. The musician can simply use 
these or edit them. With customized instruments defined by using SMaL, it 
is easy to make every piece of music sound truly unique. 

Sound effects are also created using SoundMacros, allowing complete 
control over the effect without having to sample every variation required by 
the sound designer. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



11 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



Macrolanguage vs. Parameter Setup 

All synthesizers and samplers use parameters to make modifying sounds 
easier, but in a game application the amount of data for the entirety of all 
parameters is huge. Since every single parameter needs to be processed, 
it would take too much CPU time to work with a parameter setup. 

With the macrolanguage in MusyVi, users choose from the beginning only 
those features and parameters they need to modify for each individual 
sound. This eliminates the need for setting and resetting unused or 
unneeded parameters, and gains valuable CPU time because the CPU 
does not have to process unnecessary data. 

When working with a standard synthesizer, the musician sets specific 
parameters at the beginning, and is not able to change them during the 
course of the song or sound. With the macrolanguage of Musy%, the user 
now has the tool he needs to change the parameters of a sound while it 
progresses in time, starting off with one set of parameters and concluding 
the sound with a different set. 



Layers and Keymaps 

In the same context where a Macro is the next larger structure over a 
sample, Keymaps and Layers are above Macros. 

Their design makes keymaps and layers an important tool for the musician 
to organize his data. 

In the keymap editor, the musician allocates Macros to keys of the 
keyboard, one macro per MIDI key number (1-128). This way he can 
reference up to 128 sounds (i.e. Macros) in one keymap. The keys that 
are not defined by the user remain empty. 

If the user wishes to do so, he can allocate layers or even other keymaps 
instead of Macros. 

Keymaps are perfect for creating drum sets or other complex 
arrangements. 

In comparison to a keymap, a layer is more powerful. 

In the layer editor, the musician also allocates Macros to keys of the 
keyboard. One of the main differences is that he can reference more than 
one key per Macro. He can specify whole key ranges, where the same 
Macro is supposed to play. 



08/25/99 



12 





Working with MusyX 



For the next step, he might now want to specify a key range for a different 
Macro, this key range overlapping the previously mentioned one. This 
way, whenever one of the keys that are allocated to both Macros at the 
same time is played, both Macros will play - at the same time. 

The other difference is that the size of a layer varies, whereas the size of a 
keymap is fixed by design. 

Since the musician can now work with overlapping key ranges when he 
uses a layer and is able to play several Macros simultaneously, layers are 
the perfect tools for building multi-sample instruments. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



13 



08/25/99 



MusyX Audio Tools 



Groups- Organizing Data 

Data within the system is stored in either SongGroups or FXGroups, 
depending on whether it is used for music or for Sound effects. Both 
groups contain references to all objects used in that Group, like Macros, 
layers, keymaps, samples, and tables. 

Data within the system is stored in either SongGroups or FXGroups, 
depending on whether it is a whole song or a sound effect. Both groups 
contain references to all instruments used, and to all of the macros, 
samples, and other data used to create or edit these instruments. 

In addition, SongGroups contain references to arrangements and General 
MIDI information, while FXGroups store information related to sound 
effects. 

Since the amount of memory used for sound tends to be limited, working 
with groups is an effective way to manage the data. Depending on the 
needs of the game, groups can be moved in or out of memory quickly and 
easily. 



Dynamic Voice Allocation 

In order to be played, instruments and sound effects need to be assigned 
a hardware voice. As the amount of voices is limited, MusyX uses an 
intelligent mechanism to allocate voices on the basis of priority and age. 
The system first searches for free voices and allocates any that are found. 
If no free voices are available, the system searches for the voice occupied 
by the lowest priority Sound. 

If two voices share the same lowest’ priority, allocation is based on age. 
MusyK contains an ‘age counter’ that decreases over time to determine 
age. The user can control and change both priority and age by assigning a 
priority to instruments, or by manipulating the age counter with MacroStep 
commands. 

New allocations occur only if free voices are available or if the new 
instrument has an equal or greater priority than an instrument currently 
playing. If neither is the case, the new instrument cannot be allocated. 



08/25/99 



14 






Working with Musy, 



Game Applications 

For game applications, Aft/sjkX offers a full-blown sound effect API 
including all the functions a programmer could possibly want. In a 3D 
game, for example, the programmer simply places the sound effect 
somewhere in 3D-space and the system takes care of all volume, 
panning, or surround sound changes that occur when the listener is 
changing his position in the environment of the game. For the 
programmer’s convenience a low level API is also included in case he 
prefers to handle these higher level tasks on his own. 



Data Conversion 

With the tools Musy*. provides, the programmer can quickly and easily 
transfer the generated data from his PC into the target platform’s specific 
format. This gives the musician the ability to truly concentrate on the 
creative aspects of his work. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



15 



08/25/99 




08/25/99 



16 





The Installation Process 



The Installation Process 

Hardware Setup 

A Single System Setup is the standard configuration of MusyX.. The 
connections must be as follows: 

• Connect an external Keyboard’s Midi-out to Midi-in of the computer. 

• TCP/IP MUST be installed for the communication between MusyX. 
Editor and MIDI-Slave. Although an external network connection is 
possible, it is not necessary. 

Although a One-Computer setup is the standard configuration, other 
configurations are possible. The three tools (MusyHL editor, MIDI Slave 
and Sequencer) may run on three separate machines or in any 
combination on two machines. In all cases, the following connections must 
be maintained: 

• Be sure to connect the Sequencer’s Midi-out to Midi-in of the Slave. 
(on a single system setup this will require the use of a “MIDI loopback 
device’’) 

• Connect an external Keyboard’s Midi-out to Midi-in of the Sequencer. 

• The Midi-out from the slave is not used and can be left unconnected. 

• TCP/IP MUST be installed for the communication between MusyK 
Editor and MIDI-Slave. 



One Computer Setup: 



MASTERKEYBOARD 

mmmi 



MIDI Out 



MIDI 



MusyX Editor 
& Sequencer 
& MIDI Slave 




©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



17 



08/25/99 






tffJfJI Audio Tools 



Two Computer Setup Version A: 



MusyX Editor 
& Sequencer 



MASTERKEYBOARD 

■■Mm 



MIDI Out 



MIDI 




MIDI In MIDI Out 



TCP/IP 



MIDI 



MIDI Slave 




MIDI In 



Two Computer Setup Version B: 



MASTERKEYBOARD 



Sequencer 




MusyX Editor 
& MIDI Slave 



MIDI 



MIDI 



Three Computer Setup: 



Sequencer MIDI Slave MusyX Editor 




MIDI 



MIDI 



TCP/IP 



08/25/99 



18 








The Installation Process 



Installing Mmp Con Nintendo 64 



System Requirements 

Windows 95/98 or 

Windows NT 4.0 (Slave program requires Windows 95/98) 

Pentium MMX 200Mhz (Pentium II 266Mhz or better recommended) 

64 Mbytes of RAM 

800x600 resolution or higher 

Winsocket & DirectX 3 or higher installed 

16-bit sound card 



How to Install the Software 

Install all MusyX. components from the CD via the SETUP.EXE program. 

Consult the README.TXT file in the target directory of the installation for 
the newest updates and changes. 

If you want to run your sequencer program on the same machine as the 
slave program, you should now install a MIDI loopback device, if you have 
not already installed one (See ‘MIDI Loopback Devices’ on page 28, for 
details). 

The Slave Configuration Too! 

Start the slave configuration program, "MusyX Slave Configuration", which 
can be found in the MusyX Program folder. This program will let you 
configure all aspects of the slave’s behavior. 

The default settings assume a single system setup, which is the most 
likely configuration. You will need a dual system setup only when running 
the editor under Windows NT. So you will probably want to keep the link 
configuration the way it is (See ’Installing MusyX on a Dual System 
Setup’ on page 21, for details about the dual system setup). 

Select the MIDI port you want to use to input MIDI data to the slave (e.g. a 
port provided by a MIDI loopback device). 

In the sound settings you may select the master mixing frequency to be 
used (probably 22050Hz) and the default maximum number of voices 
available at one time. The latter can be changed at runtime, too. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



08/25/99 

19 





M vsy.X Aud io T ools 



The latency value determines the speed with which the slave program can 
react to your keyboard input via MIDI. The lower the number, the shorter 
the delay or latency. Since not all systems are reliable enough in respect 
to timing to allow for short latencies, you may be forced to use a higher 
latency value. If you experience any problems, start this program again 
and increase the latency value. (When setting the number of voices keep 
in mind that the N64‘s runtime library only supports a maximum of 32 
voices, while the slave program supports up to 64 voices.) 

Finally you have to decide whether to use 16-bit RAW samples or 
compressed samples with the slave. Compressed samples give you the 
advantage of a 100% accurate preview of the sound, so you can hear how 
it will sound when played on the N64. Compressed samples have been 
ADPCM compressed, then decompressed, in order to simulate the 
realtime decompression performed by the hardware. On the other hand, 
converting the samples will take some initial setup time. 

The slave program uses a cache directory on the local hard drive to store 
compressed samples for later use. The user can define the size of this 
cache by setting the cache size value. We found that the difference in 
sound quality between raw (uncompressed) samples and compressed 
samples is minimal, and makes it therefore possible to mainly use raw 
samples. But we leave this decision up to the individual musician. 

Exit the configuration tool by clicking on "Ok“. 

You now have finished the single system setup. 



08/25/99 



20 





The Installation Process 



System Requirements for Dual System Setup 



Master 

Windows 95/98 or Windows NT 4.0 
Pentium 200Mhz or better 
32 Mbytes of RAM 
800x600 resolution or higher 
Winsocket installed 



Slave 

Windows 95/98 (NT is not supported) 

Pentium MMX 200Mhz (Pentium II 266Mhz or better recommended) 

32Mbytes of RAM or better 

800x600 resolution or higher 

Winsocket & DirectX 3 or higher installed 

16-bit sound card 



Installing Musyton a Dual System Setup 

Install all MusyVi components from the CD via the SETUP.EXE program. 

Consult the README.TXT file in the target directory of the installation for 
the newest updates and changes. 

Installing the Slave Program: 

Install the MusyX "Musician's Tools" from the CD via the Setup program. 
The other items are not required to be installed on the slave PC. 

Configuring the Slave: 

Start the slave configuration program, "MusyX Slave Configuration", which 
can be found in the MusyX Program folder. This program will let you 
configure all aspects of the slave’s behavior. 

The default settings assume a single system setup. To change to dual 
system setup simply tag the "dual system 11 checkbox. Normally it will not 
be necessary to deactivate the "automatic IP configuration 11 . If you wish to 
do so, you will have to specify the local IP of the slave manually. 

Select the MIDI port you want to use to input MIDI data to the slave (e.g. a 
port provided by a MIDI loopback device). 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

21 



08/25/99 





MusyX Audio Tools 



In the sound settings you may select the master mixing frequency to be 
used (probably 22050Hz) and the default maximum number of voices 
available at one time. The latter can be changed at runtime, too. 

The latency value determines the speed with which the slave program can 
react to your keyboard input via MIDI. The lower the number, the shorter 
the delay or latency. Since not all systems are reliable enough in respect 
to timing to allow for short latencies, you may be forced to use a higher 
latency value. If you experience any problems start this program again 
and increase the latency value. (When setting the number of voices keep 
in mind that the N64‘s runtime library only supports a maximum of 32 
voices, while the slave program supports up to 64 voices.) 

Finally you have to decide whether to use 16-bit RAW samples or 
compressed samples with the slave. Compressed samples give you the 
advantage of a 100% accurate preview of the sound, so you can hear how 
it will sound when played on the N64. Compressed samples have been 
ADPCM compressed, then decompressed, in order to simulate the 
realtime decompression performed by the hardware. On the other hand, 
converting the samples will take some initial setup time. 

The slave program uses a cache directory on the local hard drive to store 
compressed samples for later use. The user can define the size of this 
cache by setting the cache size value. We found that the difference in 
sound quality between raw (uncompressed) samples and compressed 
samples is minimal, and makes it therefore possible to mainly use raw 
samples. But we leave this decision up to the individual musician. 

Exit the configuration tool by clicking on "Ok“. 



08/25/99 



22 





The Installation Process 



Configuring the Aft/fjkX Editor: 

Start the MusyK editor program and select "environment" from the 
"options' 1 pull down menu. In the dialog box which appears, select the 
"network" panel. 



Options 



General J ■; Appearance- 1 Background ; jlfetwork 

New Slave: — 

The TCP/IP - Protocol is used. Please insert the IP-Addtess of the soundslave 
lag. 100.1 00.1 00. 100) and a valid port *Nch must be the ant a defined L>> 
the slave! 



ml 



|P-Address: 

Port: 



127 . 0 . 0.1 



11024 



Enable V/rri Lachelrn ea:e per nuance] 



QK. 



Cancel 



The default configuration assumes a single system setup. Replace the 
127.0.0.1 with the IP address of the system running the slave program. 
Make sure that the port is set to the same port as in the slave 
configuration program. (By default, they are both 1024.) 

Exit the dialog by clicking on "Ok“. 

You now have finished the dual system setup. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



23 



08/25/99 




Mu$yX Audio Tools 



Installing MusyH on Game Boy 

System Requirements 

Windows 95/98 or 

Windows NT 4.0 (Slave program requires Windows 95/98) 

Pentium MMX 200Mhz (Pentium II 266Mhz or better recommended) 

64 Mbytes of RAM 

800x600 resolution or higher 

Winsocket & DirectX 3 or higher installed 

16-bit sound card 



How to Install the Software 

Install all MusyK components from the CD via the SETUP.EXE program. 

Consult the README.TXT file in the target directory of the installation for 
the newest updates and changes. 

If you want to run your sequencer program on the same machine as the 
slave program, you should now install a MIDI loopback device, if you have 
not already installed one (See ‘MIDI Loopback Devices’ on page 28, for 
details). 

Windows 95/98 and Windows NT4.0: 

Connect your Game Boy Color with the supplied custom link cable to any 
unused parallel port of your PC. Configure the slave to use a loopback 
device. 



Windows 95/98 ONLY: 

Configure Musy& to use this parallel port (you need to know the port 
address of the parallel port you wish to use) using the Game Boy Data 
Link section of the Game Boy slave configuration. 



Windows NT4.0 ONLY: 

After installing all MusyX. components onto your PC hard drive, you will 
find a folder "Windows NT Driver" in your installation directory. Contained 
therein is a device driver for Windows NT to allow access to the parallel 
port. 

Copy the file GAMEBOY.SYS into the Windows NT system folder 
"system32\drivers". 



08 / 25/99 



24 






The Installation Process 



To setup the driver for the port address of the parallel port you wish to 
use, double-click on one of the provided registry key files. Typical 
addresses are 0x3bc, 0x378 and 0x278. If you are unsure about which 
port address to use please contact your system administrator. 

Next open the system control panel and double-click on "Devices". Locate 
the "parport" device and select it. Click on the "Startup" button and select 
"Disabled" from the list of startup options. 

Close the control panel and reboot your machine. 

Open the "Devices" control panel once more and verify that the new 
device "Gameboy" has a "started" status and an "automatic" startup state. 
If the startup state does not state "automatic" change it using the startup 
options as described above. If the service is not yet started, select it and 
press the "Start" button. If for some reason the device fails to start please 
contact your system administrator. 

Configuring the Slave 

Start the slave configuration program, "MusyX Game Boy Slave 
Configuration", which can be found in the program menu under the MusyX 
Game Boy folder. This program will let you configure all aspects of the 
slave’s behavior. 

The default settings assume a single system setup, which is the most 
likely configuration. So you will probably want to keep the link 
configuration the way it is (See ’Installing MusyX. on a Dual System 
Setup’ on page 26, for details about the dual system setup). 

Select the MIDI port you want to use to input MIDI data to the slave (e.g. a 
port provided by a MIDI loopback device). 

Configure the parallel port that Mu$yX will use to communicate with Game 
Boy, by entering the parallel port address in the Game Boy Data Link 
section. 

Exit the configuration tool by clicking on "Ok“. 

You now have finished the single system setup. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



08/25/99 

25 



hAusyA Audio Tools 



System Requirements for Dual System Setup 



Master 

Windows 95/98 or Windows NT 4.0 
Pentium 200Mhz or better 
32 Mbytes of RAM 
800x600 resolution or higher 
Winsocket installed 



Slave 

Windows 95/98 or Windows NT 4.0 

Pentium MMX 200Mhz (Pentium II 266Mhz or better recommended) 

32 Mbytes of RAM or better 
800x600 resolution or higher 
Winsocket & DirectX 3 or higher installed 

Installing MusyKon a Dual System Setup 

Install all Mus/X. components from the CD via the SETUP.EXE program. 

Consult the README.TXT file in the target directory of the installation for 
the newest updates and changes. 

Installing the Slave Program: 

Install the Afa/syX. "Musician's Tools" from the CD via the Setup program. 
The other items are not required to be installed on the slave PC. 

Configuring the Slave: 

Start the slave configuration program, "MusyX Game Boy Slave 
Configuration", which can be found in the program menu under the MusyX 
Game Boy folder. This program will let you configure all aspects of the 
slave’s behavior. 

The default settings assume a single system setup. To change to dual 
system setup simply tag the "dual system" checkbox. Normally it will not 
be necessary to deactivate the "automatic IP configuration". If you wish to 
do so, you will have to specify the local IP of the slave manually. 

Select the MIDI port you want to use to input MIDI data to the slave (e.g. a 
port provided by a MIDI loopback device). 



08 / 25/99 



26 






The Installation Process 



Configure the parallel port that MusyX will use to communicate with Game 
Boy, by entering the parallel port address in the Game Boy Data Link 
section. 

Exit the configuration tool by clicking on "Ok“. 

Configuring the Musy& Editor 

Start the Mi/syK. editor program and select "environment 1 ' from the 
"options" pull down menu. In the dialog box which appears, select the 
"network" panel. 



(Options 




Oil 


Menerat j Ap earanc 8 ground Netwc 




; i New Slave: ' ■ ' 


j 





I The TCP/IP - 


Pn: • j -> ■ i. Please in er li 1 1! Add e o tb ou idslav 


! fe.g. 1 00.1 00.1 00.1 00) and a valid port, which must ha the same as defined by • 


j the slave! 






; IP-Addie-js: 


127.0.0.1 !;. 




: Port 


1024 






:: rrrzrrr: :rrLT=: rrrrv ri:r:::r=£Sr 


- 


r Enable Write-Cache (increase performance! 




OK 


Cancel \1 



The default configuration assumes a single system setup. Replace the 
127.0.0.1 with the IP address of the system running the slave program. 
Make sure that the port is set to the same port as in the slave 
configuration program. (By default, they are both 1024.) 

Exit the dialog by clicking on "Ok“. 

You now have finished the dual system setup. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



27 



08/25/99 




Mmyy,. Audio Tools 



MIDI Loopback Devices 

Since it is not possible to loopback MIDI data within the system by default 
when using Windows, MIDI programmers and users devised a way to 
make this possible. So-called “MIDI loopback devices” are available on the 
internet (e.g. “Hubi’s MIDI loopback device” [Freeware]). Your MusyX. CD 
contains a version of this MIDI loopback device, for N64 in the directory 
called "MusyX\Gifts", and for Game Boy in a directory called "MusyXWIIDI 
loopback device". 

These devices interact with the system like hardware MIDI ports and are 
capable of routing MIDI data, eliminating the need for a real hardware 
MIDI port, when data is looped back internally. 

In the context of AfwsyXthis will let you run the slave program, the editor, 
and your sequencer program on one system with only one sound card, 
where normally you would need two soundcards to setup a hardware- 
based MIDI loopback. 

Follow the directions in the file, MIDLPBK.TXT, under FILD_25.ZIP, to 
install the MIDI loopback device. 

To run the MIDI loopback device, run the FIWMDCABLE.EXE. You can 
also make a shortcut to this program, to make it easier to start it. 

The MIDI loopback program will add a program to the Windows task bar. 
To configure it for use with Musy %, right click the program on the task bar. 
Then select LB1 for the input device and LB1 for the output device. 

Note: Make sure that your sequencer program uses LB1 for its MIDI 
output device. Also make sure that LB1 is configured in the 
Windows Multimedia Properties panel. 



08 / 25/99 



28 





The Installation Process 



Changing General Settings 

Start the MusjM . editor program and select "environment" from the 
"options" pull down menu. Select the "general" panel in the dialog which 
appears. 




This menu allows you to define external utilities and to choose your 
favorite WAV and AIF Editor. "Soundforge" is one possibility for a sample 
editor for use with Musy X, though any WAV and AIF editor can be used. 
(Soundforge is a professional Sample editing software and not included in 
the package). The third selection under External Utilities lets you add 
WinRAR as an archive. "WinRAR" provides an easy way to make backups 
of your projects; Mus^, supports the WinRAR Archiver directly from within 
the program (WinRAR is Shareware and not included in the package). 

The ‘General’ screen contains two switches for the SoundMacro editor: 

“Show comments” This enables/disables the comments under the 

value fields. 

“Show object names” This enables/disables the names shown with the 

Object Ids. 



You will also find a switch for enabling/disabling the confirmation requester 
after closing internal editors. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

29 










Audio Tools 



To customize the appearance of the Editor environment you can choose 
your own icons and wallpaper. To do so, use the "Appearance" and 
"Background" tabs in the Options screen. 

The "Network" tab allows you to set the IP address of the slave and the 
port to be used. 



08/25/99 



30 




The Installation Process 



Software Start-up Routine 

Now that your system is properly configured, perform system start-up in 
accordance with the appropriate paragraphs below. 

N64 Start-up Routine 

If this is the first time that you have run MusyX, you will find it helpful to 
refer to the "Walk Through" on page 69. 

Start "MusyX Slave" and "MusyX Editor" from your PC. 

Then, start your external sequencer program. 

Game Boy Start-up Routine 

Burn a copy of "Slave ROM" onto a flash ROM. This can be found on the 
CD under "MusyX_GB\Slaverom\gbc_slave.com". 

Plug the flash ROM into your Game Boy and turn on the Game Boy's 
power switch. 

From your PC, start "MusyX Game Boy Slave". Please refer to the 
Musician's Reference, Appendix 2. 

Start "MusyX Editor". 

Then, start your external sequencer program. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

31 



08/25/99 



Overview 



Overview 

How Musy* Works 

The purpose of Musy& is to produce sound. Both musical instruments and 
sound effects are based upon what is simply called a sound. 



The composition of a sound within MusyK. 

SOUND 




A sound in itself is made up of a group of underlying data structures. A 
sound can be constructed from these data structures in different ways 
using three different tools. 

Every sound must contain at least one SoundMacro. A SoundMacro is 
nothing more than a very simple and easy-to-understand program that 
defines what is being done to produce a sound over time. The 
programming language used in a SoundMacro is called SMaL (Sound 
Macro Language). 

Another way of looking at the mechanism of a SoundMacro would be to 
consider a sound as being made up of a number of events that take place 
on a time line. Encoded in SMaL, the actions needed to define this sound 
are listed in the SoundMacro. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

33 



KSJ?M Audio Tools 



Every sound contains at least one SoundMacro, though it could very well 
contain more than one. Some sounds only need one sample at a time, but 
every MIDI key has to be occupied by a different sample. 

More complex sounds may demand the use of more than one sample at 
any one given time. To organize multiple SoundMacros running within one 
sound, MmfA offers two data structures: Keymaps and Layers. 



08 / 25/99 



34 




SoundMacros and the SoundMacro Editor 



SoundMacros and the SoundMacro Editor 

General 

SoundMacros are simple, straightforward ‘programs’ that are used to 
define sounds. A very simplistic SoundMacro, on a sample-based system 
like the Nintendo 64, might say something like this (not formulated using 
the SMaL programming language, but in simple English): 

1 . ) Use a specified ADSR 

2. ) Start a specified sample 

3. ) End 

SoundMacros do far more than simply start samples or oscillators. 
SoundMacros have the ability to reference data, and thereby, to bind that 
data to the sound. This example references data defining an ADSR and a 
sample. 

In addition, a SoundMacro does not necessarily need to start sound 
reproduction immediately. As mentioned above, starting a sound with a 
SoundMacro could simply reserve a voice. 

The SoundMacro may do a number of things before any sample or 
oscillator is started, e.g. create a set waiting period among other things. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 

35 



08/25/99 




M-usyJ, Audio Tools 



Creating a SoundMacro 

To be able to use the full potential of SoundMacros, it is helpful to 
understand the basics of how the Sound routine really handles a “sound". 

If a new note is received via MIDI, a logic routine searches for a free voice 
and starts a SoundMacro (some lower performance systems, such as 
Game Boy, may use a fixed voice allocation scheme instead). 

A SoundMacro is a small program made up of special commands 
comparable to a very simple form of the BASIC language. SoundMacros 
can be quickly and easily programmed from scratch, but you may also use 
and enhance existing SoundMacros either by template or by library 
functions. 

To create a new SoundMacro, select the folder “SoundMacros” of the 
Object-pool. Then double-click inside the view area of the project window 
or use the “new” entry from the pop-up menu [click right mousebutton]. Be 
sure not to double-click on the name of an existing SoundMacro, because 
this would open the SMaL-editor. 

It is also possible to transfer a SoundMacro from one project to another. 
Both the source and destination Projects must be opened. Then drag the 
desired SoundMacro from the source Project to the target Project and 
drop it into the “SoundMacros” folder. All dependent Objects will then be 
copied to the new Project automatically. 



08 / 25/99 



36 




SoundMacros and the SoundMacro Editor 



Creating SoundMacros by Using Templates 

The easiest way to create SoundMacros is by using one of the templates 
from the pop-up menu inside the sample-pool. Simply select a Sample, 
click [right mousebutton] and select “Templates - Generate SoundMacro" 
from the popup menu. 



Editing SoundMacros 



1 



Soundmacioeditor B 79. Cello.mxin 



4 @1 ADDPRIOCNT 

j 

5 -J WAIT M 
• 6 _jEM 0 
jStep: 0 



| ;F 






H jHlBll||!Bil 


1 


HI r~~l 


lliS 


■HHI 


■ ... 










■s 

1 

i 


Jo 




1 








•el ;calf . Offset 










~|0 n P~ 


IP? 1 


II 


j 


WMmmmt. § 1111111 


wmm 


layoff Bandar 






. Mife 


. M -m 




_J 1 


Jl II 


|| 


□rznr~i 









|| 


^1 1 1 








li 




□no®. 




B§ 1KI 


• , ole sr id 




Mlsec; 






"11 II ' 




□□m 



SoundMacros are built by combining MacroStep commands into a SMaL 
program. All SoundMacro commands are available in and defined by a 
plain-text Macro definition file. The MacroStep commands are different for 
each different target platform, and there is a separate Macro Definition File 
for each platform. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



37 



08/25/99 










Audio Tools 



The Command Pool 



To spare the programmer the effort of typing 
in each MacroStep Command, MusyX comes 
with a graphical interface for the creation of 
SoundMacros. 

The Command Pool Window contains all 
MacroStep commands that are available for a 
particular platform. To easily create a 
SoundMacro, drag these commands from the 
Command Pool and drop them into the 
SoundMacro Editor. 

A new command dropped on top of another 
will be inserted before the existing command. 
To delete a command, select it with either the 
cursor keys or the mouse and press “Delete” 
on your computer keyboard. A dialog box will 
ask you to confirm the deletion (this can be 
turned off in the Options screen). 

All SMaL programs must finish with the “END” 
command. This command cannot be moved 
to a different place in the program or deleted. 

A complete listing of MacroStep commands 
and their features can be found in the 
Musicians Reference, along with a selection 
of "sample" SoundMacros. 



^1112553 


-Inlxl 




| - STRUCTURE 


W 


STOP 


£ 


SPLIT KEY 


' ■. 


SPLITVEL 


: ; : 


WAIT_TIlKS 


1 i : lif 


LOOP 


: : : ' 


GOTO 


h t 


WAIT_MS 


| : j fH 


PLAYMACRO 


1 ; : ■ • G 


SEND! EYOFF 


1 • i 


SPUTMOD 




SPLIT RND 


j , v 


TRAP_KEY0FF 


1 h- t & 


UNTRAP_KEY0FF 


J, 


IF_EQUAL 


. 


IF_LESS 


■ g «#• SA 


MPLE 


: fm 


START SAMPLE 


| i 


STOPSAMPLE 


- ^ VOLUME | 


1 | / 


SET AD SR 


1 i 1* 


SCALEVOLUME 


■ t-'i 


ENVELOPE 


1 .*■ 


FADE-IN 


- ♦ PITCH 


? 


PORT LAST ] 


J 


RNDNOTE 


, J 


ADDNOTE 


: 1 


SETNOTE 


-] 


LAST NOTE 


■ J 


VIBRATO 


■ J 


PITCHSV/EEP1 


:■ i 


PITCHSWEEP2 


j ■ 


SETPITCH 



08 / 25/99 



38 






SoundMacros and the SoundMacro Editor 



Editing Values 

Most MacroStep commands contain parameters. These parameters can 
be divided into three different groups: Numerical, Switch, and Reference. 
All parameters can be selected for editing with either the cursor keys or 
the mouse. 

To adjust numerical parameters, select a parameter box and type over the 
value. The value is updated the moment the parameter is de-selected. De- 
selecting a parameter by using the “Enter” key on the computer keyboard 
allows value updates while leaving the cursor on the parameter, making it 
easier to quickly re-edit the parameter. 

Numerical parameters can also be entered as a hexadecimal value if a “$” 
is typed before the number. After pressing “enter” the value will be saved 
and displayed as a decimal number again. 

Switch parameters contains only two settings: On and Off. To toggle these 
either double-click or use the return key. 

Reference parameters are similar to numerical parameters except that the 
numbers here represent ID’s instead of values. Each ID references 
another piece of data within the system, like a sample or a table. The 
visual difference between IDs and values is that the name of the 
referenced object is shown behind the number. 

Parameters can also be increased or decreased using the +/- keys (Switch 
values will change between on and off). 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

39 



08/25/99 




MuSyJi Audio Tools 



Loops and Jumps in SIVlaL 

With some commands you can build loops and jumps, either conditional or 
unconditional. For more details refer to the Macro command-reference. 

While jumps to illegal locations will be detected by the slave program and 
cause the macro program to be stopped, the runtime libraries do NOT 
perform such tests. So you have to be careful when using jumps. 



Calling other SoundMacros in SIVlaL 

It is possible to call other SoundMacros from a running SoundMacro. This 
can be helpful to define subroutine SMaL-programs or to further structure 
your work. 

For more details refer to the Macro command-reference. 



08 / 25/99 



40 





Keymaps and Layers 



Keymaps and Layers 

General 

Musy& provides two structures to allow the building of even more complex 
sounds, keymaps and layers. 

Keymaps and layers allow you to start or reference SoundMacros, as well 
as other keymaps and layers, depending on which key is being 
depressed/received via MIDI. 




Because of the performance of the Game Boy / Game Boy Color, 
keymaps and layers are NOT supported on this system. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



41 



08/25/99 




Mi MyX Audio Tools 



Keymaps 

A keymap is basically a large table containing an entry for each of the 128 
MIDI keys that exist in the MIDI standard. When a specific key is used, 
MusyX looks at the entry belonging to the current key and starts the 
specified SoundMacro or Layer. In addition, other parameters like panning 
offsets, volume and so on can be specified for each entry. 

A keymap can be used to build a simple multi-sample instrument or to 
design a drum set. 




Parameters 



Keynum, Key 


Rather than a real parameter, this information describes 
which key number this entry belongs to. The GM- 
instrument usually mapped here is displayed as a 
reference. 


ID 


The ID of the object assigned to this key. It can be a 
macro, keymap or layer. 


Name 


The name of the object assigned to this key. 


Transp 


Transposes the sound from a single key up or down in 
one-note steps. 


Pan 


Panning-Offset - adjusts the pan position of the sound 
relative to the one of the keymap. 


Srrnd 


If this is not zero, the sound on this key will be played 
through the surround-channel. 


PrioOfs 


Priority Offset - adjusts the priorities of the sounds from 
the keymap. This value is added to the priority which is 
used to “start” this keymap. 



08 / 25/99 



42 





Keymaps and Layers 



Create a Mew Keymap 

To create a new keymap, select the "keymap" folder from the Object-pool. 




Then go to the right side of the project window and double-click in an area 
without text, or press the right mouse button, and select "new" from the 
resulting pop-up menu. Don't double-click on an existing keymap (in the 
list), because you will edit that keymap, instead. 




A keymap may be transferred from one project to another by dragging it 
from one project into the keymaps folder of the current project. Ali 
dependent objects will be copied automatically. The keymap is ready to 
use in the new project. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



43 



08/25/99 




AlitJSyJC Audio Tools 



Layers 

This structure is even more flexible. The length of a layer is flexible and, in 
contrast to a keymap, an entry here is not necessarily linked to a single 
key but rather to a key range. These ranges may even overlap between 
different layers. 

When a key is being played, MusyX. checks all entries in a layer and 
simultaneously starts all SoundMacros in the entries whose ranges 
contain the current key in their keyrange. 

Since it is possible to let the Macros used for specific key ranges overlap, 
layers allow the musician to build a more elaborate multi-sample 
instrument. 

Layers can cause multiple Objects to be started simultaneously. It can 
also be useful for non-drum mappings of Objects to zones on the 
keyboard. You can reference SoundMacros or Keymaps here. 



Layers Can be Used to: 



• Make stacks of 2 or more sounds 

• Create stereo sounds 

• Map sounds to zones of the keyboard 



X Lay 


er Editor 


— 14. S IringE nsemble2 mxl 














HB S21 1 


i m 


Object! D 




Key Lo 






[ ■ 


91 




PrioOfs 




lilllll 


|23Hj§ 


SlrBass.mxm 


0 


m 








m 


0 




-x. 


73 


Cello_Afco.mxrn 


43 


37 


0 


118 


83 


0 


0 




2 


74 


U Itr aS tr ing_Ar co. mxrn 


PjO 


68 


0 


90 


64 


o 


0 




3 




Viola_Afco. mxm 


69 


78 


0 


127 


60 


0 


0 


4 




Violin_Aico.rrixrn 


79 


127 


0 


127 


30 


0 


0 



The example layer above, “StringEnsemble2.mxl”, would be presented on 
the keyrange like this: 



1 Cl ( 24) 


C2 (36) 


C3 (48) 


C4 (68) 


C5 (72) 


cs 1 


1 + 


+ 


+ 




+ 


4 1 



- 

T 1 IT Strips* 

i i i i I i i i i 




uni m in i in 

\- a 



ICello„Arco 

i i I I I TT" iT T 1 



VioisjArcoi 

' X 



I it . 1 1 i 

i I I I II 



08/25/99 



44 










Key maps and Layers 



Parameters 

ObjectID 

Name 
KeyLo 
Key Hi 
Transp 

Vol 

Pan 

Srrnd 

PrioOfs 



The objectID from the object on this key. It can be a Macro, 
keymap or layer. 

The name of the object from this key. 

Specifies the lowest key of this range. 

Specifies the highest key of this range. 

Transposes the sound from this range in one-note steps up or 
down. 

Volume setting defines volumes of instruments and sounds 
relative to the volume of the Layer. 

Panning-Offset adjusts the panorama position of a sound 
relative to the one of the layer. 

If this is not 0, the sound on this key will be played through the 
surround-channel. 

Priority Offset adjusts the priorities of the sounds from the layer 
among each other. This value is added to the priority which is 
used to “start” this Layer. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



45 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



Create a New Layer 

To create a new Layer, first select the “Layers” folder of the Object-pool. 





S' 


GM-Set.mxp 








Hii 


pj 


©i Groups 


Name 


1 ObiectlD I Reterence-TInto. 


i 




: if GM_Set 


©|Alto_Sax.rnxl 


16 


Ml 48, Ml 46, Ml 47 




ini 


Object Pool 


Q1 Atmosphere, mxl 


41 


M 231, M 232 






I- §B Sounds 


©] BagPipe. mxl 


47 


M265, M266, M267 






- ©3 Laver* 


©| Bandneori.rnxl 


29 


Ml 76, Ml 34 


~jJ;j 




; _j 1 eym% 


Q| Baritone Sax.mxl 


17 


Ml 45. Ml 46, Ml 43 






© o Soundmacros 1 


0] Bass&Lead.mxl 


37 


M210.M155 






:• 111 Tables 

S-Ga Samples \ 


B1 BassoonDboe.mxl 
01 BowedG lass, mxl 


: 39 
45 


M222.M223 
M259, M258, M2G0 








fil ChifferLead.mxl 


: 30 


Ml 26, Ml 27, Ml 28. 


Ml 28, h 






SI Choir, mxl 


; 6 


Ml 02, Ml 05, Ml 06 








QI Clarinet. mxl 


42 


M 250, M 251, M 249 








QI Cristal.mxl 


40 


M230, M229 








Q| DistortionGuitar. mxl 


35 


M21 4, M215 M216 








©| Dulcimer mxl 


21 


Ml 73 Ml 74 








©1 Echoes mxl 


52 


M 278. M 279 


T .|: 






4 j 




J 


■ ,±L i-j 



Then go to the right side of the project window and double-click in an area 
without text, or press the right mouse button, and select "new" from the 
resulting pop-up menu. 



GM-Set.mxp 



,_j Groups 
- -|>1 GM_Set 
Object Pool 
_J Sounds 

‘-Si ii-ayerL 

t jH Keyrnaps 
i±i E3 Soundmacros 
: ■ in!! Tables 
+ _j Samples 



Name 






□in 



Sax.mxl 
©I Atmosphere, nrixl 
Q1 BagPipe. rnxl 
SlBandneon.rnxI 
Q| Baritone Sax.mxl 
~ '1 B -i ' Lead.mxl 
^ D assoonObne.rnxl 
owedGlass rnxl 
©1 ChitierLead.roxI 
©1 Choir rnxl 
©1 Clarinet rnxl 
©1 brutal rnxl 
©1 DistortionGuitar rnxl 
-©'I Dulcimer rnxf 
©I Echoes rnxl 



1G Ml 48, Ml 46, Ml 47 

41 M 231, M 232 

47 M265, M266, M267 

23 ; Ml 76, Ml 94 

17 Ml 45, Ml 46, Ml 49 

37 M 210, Ml 55 

39 M222 M 223 

46 M 359, M 258, M260 

yiew ► | Ml 27 Ml 28, Ml 29, t.- 
. Ml 05. Ml 06 
, M251 . M243 

40 : M230.M229 

35 M214. M215, M216 

21 Ml 73, Ml? 4 

52 , M278.M279 



Don't double-click on an existing layer (in the list), because you will edit 
that layer, instead. 



08/25/99 



46 






Keymaps and Layers 



Importing a Layer from another project is also possible. Both the source 
and the destination Project must be opened. Then simply drag the desired 
Layer from the source Project to the target Project and drop it on the 
“Layers” folder. Ail dependent Objects will be copied to the new Project 
too. The layer is ready to use in the new Project. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



47 



08/25/99 



The Sound Editor 



The Sound Editor 



What is a Sound? 

In MusyX, a sound is used to define an instrument. 

Since an Instrument can consist of different Objects like Keymaps, Layers 
or SoundMacros, the Sound definition can be used to define the parental 
Object. 

Once defined, Sounds can also be exported to a single file, including all 
dependent objects. Exported Sounds can easily be imported into other 
Projects. 




Defining Sounds and Import/Export 

To create a new Sound, first select the “Sounds” folder of the Object-pool. 
Then go to the right side of the project window and double-click in an area 
without text, or press the right mouse button, and select "new" from the 
resulting pop-up menu. Don't double-click on an existing sound (in the list), 
because you will edit that sound, instead. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



49 



08/25/99 






MusyX Audio Tools 



This Object can then be easily exported to a single file including all 
dependent Objects (also Samples). 

To import a Sound Export File select the “Sounds” folder and choose 
“Import” from the pop-up menu [right mousebutton] inside the view area. 

Transferring a Sound from another project is also possible. Both the 
source and the destination Project must be opened. Then simply drag the 
desired Sound from the source Project to the target Project and drop it on 
the “Sounds” folder. All dependent Objects will be copied to the new 
Project, too. 



08 / 25/99 



50 




The Sound Editor 



The Sound Object Properties Window 



After creating a Sound object you can view the object properties window. 
Here you can give the new Sound a name and edit some additional 
information. This information includes the author's name, comments and 
some attributes to describe the Sound. These definitions do not change 
the sound, they are only used to categorize a sound object. 

These properties are not only available for Sounds, but for all objects 
(Layers, Keymaps, Soundmacros, Tables and Samples). In combination 
with the search objects window, this can be used to search for a specific 
sound in a large project. 




©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

51 






A description of the fields and buttons is included below. 



Name 
ObjectID 
"Find new" 
Comment 
Author 

Audio compression 

Category 

Sub category 

Sound 

Pitch 

Duration 

"Copy" 

"Copy recursive" 



Change the name of the object 

Change the ID number of an object 

Used to find a new available ID for the object 

Used for a short description of the sound 

Author’s name can be entered here 

Type of compression used for a sample object 

Choose from a list of instrument types 

Some instrument types have a sub type 

Sound character 

Frequency range 

Length of the sound 

Sets the same attributes to the defined parent object 
of the sound (a layer, keymap or a soundmacro) 
Sets the same attributes to ALL child objects of the 
sound including dependent objects 





The Sound Editor 



The Search Window 

This window is used to find objects in a large project. Here, you can 
search for one or more of the attributes for object properties. Additionally, 
there are fields for the time & date and file size (important for samples) of 
the objects. 




Before you can start searching, you have to choose the project using the 
"change project" button. Only opened projects can be searched. 



If you edited some or all of the fields for your desired object, simply hit the 
search button and all matching objects will be listed. 

Samples can be auditioned by selecting them and then hitting the space 
bar on the keyboard. Found objects can also be dragged into a new 
project, if you drop them on their destination folder in the project window. 

Hint: You can also create your own sound and object library, using a 
normal project that can be opened at the same time as your working 
project. Finished objects can be copied by drag & drop, to the library 
project for later use in other projects. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



53 



08/25/99 







Mmfd Audio Tools 




08 / 25/99 



54 




Organizing Data 



Organizing Data 

General 

The basic structure MusyVL uses to organize the data of whole songs or a 
set of sound effects is a group. For structuring the data even further, 
groups may be sorted into groupsets. These structures constitute sub- 
directories and are simply a means to get your project organized. 

By splitting a whole project into small units, the amount of data which has 
to be present at a given time can be limited. Keep in mind that memory is 
limited. Sound usually is one of the first things where people are trying to 
save some space when memory space gets tight. 




Mt/syX uses two types of groups: SongGroups and SFXgroups. 




Note: The example project's "SongGroup" is named "Demo". The actual 
name is arbitrary. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



55 



08/25/99 









Audio Tools 



SongGroups contain all data that is necessary to play back one or more 
songs (useful to keep a level-music and a boss-music together in the 
memory). They reference all song data generated with an external 
sequencer program, as well as all sounds that are used as instruments 
within the songs. 

MIDI uses program numbers from 1 to 128 to identify instruments. MusyK 
maps sounds to these numbers using the Soundlist or Drumchannel from 
the SongGroup Properties, which contain one entry for each MIDI program 
number. To access the songgroup's properties, simply double-click the 
songgroup in the project window. 



JS\ 



m 



■■■id "■'-■■ 






■rf-M-ttA, isjnsij! MK-. ■] 



^D! 




The Soundlist and the Drumchannel, together with some other data, 
represent a SongGroup. This SongGroup can contain more than one 
song, as long as those songs use the same instrument definitions. 

In the tab “Songs/Midifiles”, MIDI-files can be entered. This does not serve 
an immediate purpose during development, but is necessary for the 
conversion of the data. When converting the data, the Editor uses the 
entry to determine which file has to be included in the conversion. 

Each song referenced by a specific SongGroup has its own MIDI-setup. 
This structure consists of 16 channels that are referenced by the 
SongGroup. The MIDI-setup contains initial settings for some major MIDI 
controllers and allocates the programs (i.e. instruments) that are to be 
initially played to their MIDI channels. 

The settings can be changed while the song is in progress, allowing for 
instruments to be changed in mid-song. 



08/25/99 



56 




Organizing Data 



The Drumchannel, e.g., is for MIDI channel 10, which is defined as the 
drum channel in the General MIDI standard. The other 15 MIDI channels 
can be referenced with sounds from the soundlist the way the musician 
chooses. 




SFXgroups basically consist of just one large table containing one entry 
for each sound effect to be defined. Each sound effect uses a specific 
sound. Since several sound effects can start with the same sound, it is 
imperative that sound effects define other parameters like priority, 
Maxvoices and Default Panning to differentiate the sound effects. 




Properties — test.mxp. SFXgroup 



. 2 


4 


LaserS hoot, mxm 


40 


4 


127 6 


60 


LASER 


3 


5 


Bonus.mxm 


iso 


■2 


127 6 


60 


BONIJ.- 


{4 


G 


SmartBomb.mxm 


iso 


[ '7 


127 G 


60 


SNAP TBOM 


j 5 


;0 




• 1 0 


\ -755 


127 6 


60 





To further simplify the teamwork between sound artist and programmer, 
each sound effect is assigned a Label. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



57 



08/25/99 





Audio Tools 



MmyK automatically generates a header file that defines constants, which 
the programmer can use to reference the sound effects at runtime. These 
constants contain the Label that is assigned to the sound effect. 

As a result of this labeling, musician and programmer no longer have to 
pass cryptic sound effect ID numbers to each other in order to synchronize 
their work. 

Because they gather together a predefined set of sounds to be used as 
sound effects, SFXgroups are the perfect tool for organizing multiple 
groups of sound effects, e.g. all sound effects that are to be used in a 
specific level of a game. 



08/25/99 



58 



Organizing Data 



Managing Groups 

To create a new Group, click [right mousebutton] on the Groupfolder and 
select “New“ from the pop-up menu. 




MOsys FX Soundsystem 



I )f layei_demo.mxp 



ObjeetID 



macro, mxm 



I rLl Layers 
m K.eymaps 
C_J Soundmacro: 
_J Tables 
wJ Samples 



You have the following choices: 

• SongGroup is used for one or several Songs 

• SFX-Group for one or several Sound-FX 

• Object-Group to collect a bunch of Objects 

• Groupset similar to a Folder which can contain several 

other Groups 






Audio Tools 



SongGroups and Their Parameters 

A SongGroup is comparable to a set of soundprograms and multisetups of 
a synthesizer or sampler. For every SongGroup that represents a level or 
stage in a game you have to sort the required “Sounds" from the Object 
Pool into a Soundlist to assign them to the correct MIDI program number. 

To edit a SongGroup, double-click on it to open the Properties window. 
Inside the Properties window, you can edit the “Soundlist or select one or 
several “MIDI files” for this SongGroup. This “Soundlist represents Ml Dl- 
programs that reference the instruments for channel 1-9, 11-16 and the 
“Drumchannel" for MIDI-channel 10 in the MIDI setup. 




Take a closer look at the Soundlist. On the very left you see the MIDI 
specific program change number from 1 to 128. 

The GM equivalent soundprogram is listed behind the number, but it is not 
obligatory to follow this “guideline". You can put a Bass sound on MIDI 
program #1 if you want to, but realize that it will be a Bass and not a Piano 
if you later select this soundnumber from your Sequencer. 

The Drumchannel is very similar to the Soundlist, but for GM-compatibility 
reasons it represents an alternate list of Sounds (in this case Drumkits) 
always solely for MIDI channel #10. 



08/25/99 



60 






Organizing Data 



To enter a Sound into the Soundlist or Drumchannel, select the desired 
number and double-click on it or press the “Enter" key on your computer 
keyboard. A dialog box will show all objects from the pool that fit in here, 
such as Sounds, Layers, Keymaps or SoundMacros. 




I [Sounds] 



Path: Object Pool'-, 



If you do not use program changes in your MIDI-file, please also read the 
section of this manual concerning MIDI Setups, because you need to pre- 
set the MIDI programs to the MIDI channels. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



61 



08/25/99 





MusyA Audio Tools 



SFXgroups and Their Parameters 

In the simplest case, a Soundeffect is just a Sound or a SoundMacro. 
Within the system, of course, SFX are handled somewhat differently than 
Sounds or SoundMacros. 

Because the programmer of a game wants to be able to insert SFX into 
his program as easily as possible, the sound designer has to define one or 
more special tables called SFX-Groups. 

The first major difference between SongGroups and SFX-Groups is the 
length of the Table. An SFX-Group can handle many more Sound IDs 
than a SongGroup can. Thus the table-length varies and in contrast to a 
SongGroup, a newly created SFX-Group has no entries to edit. 

To add new entries, use the “Add new” function of the pop-up menu by 
right-clicking inside the SFX-Group properties window. 



Jg Properties — test.mxp, SFXgroup 



Information $ {^-Definition I Group-Options 



JM 



ID 


Macro 


Name of Sourdmacro 


Priority 


Maxvoice 


Det.Vel 


Del. Pan 


Def.Key Label 


Comme 


1 


2 


Explosion, mxm 


40 


4 


127 


04 60 EXPLOSION 


2 


4 


LaserS hoot, nixnt 


40 


4 


127 


04 00 LASER 


T 5 


Bonus, mxm 


50 


2 


127 


04 60 BONUS 




4 


6 


SmartBomb.mxm 


50 


2 


127 


64 60 SMART BOM 




5 


0 




10 


255 


127 


04 00 





Delete 
Delete all 



Strq+D 



Export SFX-E ntfies. . . S tta+E 
Print SEX-Entries.. Strg+P 



±J 



Flere you can now enter, for example, the name of the Macro, or you may 
enter a Layer. You can also adjust parameters, if you wish to do so. 



08 / 25/99 



62 





Organizing Data 



Testing Sound Effects 

It is possible to test SFX with the MusyK editor and slave before 
incorporating them into the game. This is useful to check priority settings or 
volume levels. 

First you have to send the desired SFX-group to the slave the same way you 
would send a SongGroup. If the slave receives a SFX-group, it automatically 
switches to a different playmode. 

Beginning with MIDI-channel #1 every keynumber represents one SFX-ID 
and can be played by a connected MIDI keyboard or the virtual MIDI 
keyboard. A connected external keyboard has the advantage that more than 
one SFX can be triggered at the same time. 

If there are more than 128 SFX, MIDI channel #2 represents IDs 128-255, 
MIDI channel #3 represents IDs from 256 to 383 and so on. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 

63 



08/25/99 



lAittSyX Audio Tools 



The Parameters 



ID 

Macro 

Name 

Priority 

Maxvoices 

Def.Vel 

Def.Pan 

Def.Key 

Label 

Comment 



The number that the programmer sends to the SFX-API to 
start a SFX using the defined label (see below) 

SoundMacro number 

Name of the SoundMacro 

A Priority number for each SFX, if voices are shared 

The maximum of voices allowed for this SFX 

Default velocity or Start-volume (the programmer can override 
this value) 

Default panning (the programmer can override this value) 

The default key (the programmer can override this value) 

The programmer uses this label to reference a SFX 
Comments for each SFX 



08/25/99 



64 






Organizing Data 



Managing the Object Pool 

You can create unlimited sub-folders for any kind of Object inside the 
Pool. To do this, select an existing folder and use the “Create folder” entry 
of the pop-up menu [right mousebuttonj. This is useful for organizing your 
work. 



Adding Samples 

To add a sample to your project, first select the samplefolder from the 
Object-pool. You can either double-click inside the view area of the 
Sample-pool or choose “new” from the pop-up menu [right mousebuttonj. 

You can now select a sample you want to import through the appearing 
file dialog box. If you select a sample using the mouse or the cursor keys, 
you can play it through your Soundcard from within the editor by pressing 
“space” on your computer keyboard. This can be done any time you select 
a sample in any window or dialog box. 

MvsyK supports both Microsoft WAV and Macintosh AIF files. WAV files, 
however, often do not support loops and MusyX. then uses them only for 
one-shot samples. AIF files support both loops and one-shot format and 
are preferred for use with MusyX.. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

65 



08/25/99 



MusyJ. Audio Tools 



The Different Parts of a Project 

All of the data of one game soundtrack is called a Project. 

Within a project the system distinguishes between two different basic data 
types, Groups and Objects. 

A Group is a collection of Objects belonging to the same level or stage of 
a game. It can be a SongGroup, SFX-Group or a Groupset of Groups. 

Which one of these it is going to be depends on the need of the project or 
the game. To choose a way to organize the data for a game is at the 
user’s discretion. 





When contemplating the sounddefinition side, one will find a more 
complex data hierarchy. In this context, a Sample is the lowest part of a 
Sound. A Sound on the other side represents the highest kind of data in a 
sounddefinition. 

Hint: Layers and Keymaps can refer to each other or to SoundMacros. 



08/25/99 



66 





Organizing Data 



How the Structure Relates to the Actual Game Data 

There is no major structural difference between the Project data used 
inside the Manager and the final converted Game data. The Project data 
is of course more comprehensive, since it contains additional information, 
e.g. names of Objects. Samples may also be stored in a different format 
from the one needed for the destination platform. 



Transferring Data Between Projects 

Objects can be transferred between Projects either by exporting and 
importing Sound-objects, or simply by dragging any desired Object from 
one Project window to another. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



67 



08/25/99 




08 / 25/99 



68 




The Project Manager 



The Project Manager 



General 

The Project Manager is the main working environment of Musy%t. It is 
used to edit and manage all data related to the project. 










fb F“3i&c:T UP?«fri 






iiiwi H&itzw 



'Sfce&sc. 



A typical screen layout of the Project Manager. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



69 



08/25/99 








Audio Tools 



Project Manager Menus 



File Menu Description 

New project... 

Open protect... 

Reopen ► 

Exit 



New 



Creates a new project 



Open Opens a saved project 

ReOpen Chooses a saved project from a list of the last 10 

recent projects 

Exit Exits MusyK -Manager 



After you open a project, the Project Menu becomes available. 
Project Menu Description 

Save as.., 

G enerate script/ ile for export. . 

Backup... 

Search M r ' . 

Browse objects in tree... 

Scan tor new files... 

Delete all unnecessary files... 

Options... 

Update, sample-information 
Refresh ohjectlist 
Close all editors 

Close 



Save 


Saves the active project 


Save as 


Saves the project under a different name 


Generate scriptfile 


Scriptfile for the converter 


for export... 





08 / 25/99 



70 










The Project Manager 



Backup When a valid path to a WinRAR archive program is 

entered in the Options menu, this menu item will be 
activated. When selected, it will use this program to 
"RAR" all data of the project together into one file. 
This may not be used to archive or transport data 
easily. 




Search objects Searches for objects using the library functions 



Browse objects in Opens an additional project window with the 
tree. . . complete tree of all objects and their hierarchy. 




Scan for new Files that are copied or saved to the project 

files... directories by external tools can easily be imported 



into the project with this function 

Delete all Deletes all files that are not related to or depending 

unnecessary on objects within the project. 

files... 




Options... Setup options relating to the project. 




Update sample- Updates the cached sample information if samples 
information were changed by external tools. 

Refresh objectlist This causes the object reference list (in the right- 



hand part of the project window) to be refreshed 
manually. Not only the display will be refreshed, but 
also the internal data structures. During normal use 
of the editor, there should be no need to use this 
function. 

Close all editors Closes all open editors at once 



Close Closes the project 



Options Menu Description 

Environment... I 



Environment Options and setup of the editors environment 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



71 



08/25/99 









MusyA Audio Tools 



Window Menu Description 

Cascade ► 

life ► 

Align Commandpool Windovvfs) 

1 MIDI 'Setup 

2 State 

2 Network: Master 

4 Properties - (empty) 

5 Search Objects {disabled) 

S Midi-Keyboard 

? Commandpool • Testpr.ojeet.mxp 
>/ § T estpfoiect.rnxp 



Undo last 
command 


Undoes any window arrangements 


Cascade 


Re-arranges windows in an overlapping diagonal 
line. You can choose between “all windows 11 and 
“Project windows" or “Editors" only. 


Tile 


Re-arranges windows. You can choose between 
“Project windows" or “Editors 11 . 

Aligns the commandpool-window with the right side 
of the main window 


Align commandpool 


1 Midisetup 

2 State 


Quickselect for the Midisetup-window 
Quickselect for the Status-window 


3 Network: Master 


Quickselect for the Network/Master-window 


4 Properties 


Quickselect for the Group-/Object- Properties- 
window 


5 Search Objects 


Quickselect for the Librarian search window 
(disabled until a project is opened) 


6 Midi-Keyboard 


Quickselect for the Virtual MIDI-keyboard window 


7 Commandpool 


Quickselect for the Commandpool window 


8 Testproject.mxp 


Quickselect for an open project 



08 / 25/99 



72 





The Project Manager 



Info Menu Description 




About MusyX. Developers information & copyright notice 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



73 



08/25/99 




Walk Through 



Walk Through 

General 

This chapter provides a step by step example of how to design a simple 
instrument and a simple sound effect and export it so that the programmer 
can include it into his or her game. 

The steps are: 

• Start the MusfA Editor 

• Create a Project 
® Import a Sample 

• Create an Instrument using a SoundMacro 

• Create and setup a SongGroup 

• Make a short MIDI sequence 

• Create a Sound-FX 

• Convert the data 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



75 



08/25/99 



Start the Soundslave 



Start the slave manually from Win95/98-Startmenu/Programs/ Mmpi.. 



Launch the Musfli Editor 

Start the “MusyA Editor" from the Win95-Startmenu or directly by double- 
clicking the MusyX. -Icon from your desktop if available. 




The Manager screen after startup 



08 / 25/99 



76 









Walk Through 



Creating a New Project 

Select “New project" from the ‘File’ pull down menu. 



This opens a regular File dialog box, where you name the Project. For this 
example name it “Testproject”. 




Next, choose a Macro definition file. This file can be found in your 
J#l/Sj^\bin\misc Folder (“macrodef.mxd”). This file defines the set of 
commands used by the SoundMacro language (SMaL). The Game Boy 
macro definition file is located in MusyX-GB\macrolibrary. 




Finally a confirmation window appears and you have the option to create 
the project (click on the “Create”-buttonj. 







Walk Through 



The Project Window 

The newly created Project looks like this: 



^ Testproject.mxp 






1 Groups 

i Er U.I Object Pool 





From this window you have access to all data related to the project. It is 
split into a left and right area. On the left side is a folder structure, the 
“Groups” and the “Object Pool”. On the right side of the window is the view 
area where the Sound-Objects are displayed. (Since a new Project 
contains no Sound-Objects, this area is empty at the moment.) 

The “Object Pool” contains Subfolders for sound-related Objects like 
Samples, SoundMacros, Layers, Keymaps, Tables and sounds, but more 
about this later. For now we need only Samples and SoundMacros. 

The “Groups” are mainly used to organize the different sounds into 
SongGroups (e.g. for the different levels of a game) and SFX-Groups (lists 
of Sound effects). 

The next step is to add a Sample and build an Instrument using a 
SoundMacro. MusyK supports both Microsoft WAV files and Macintosh 
AIF files. 

Keep in mind that WAV files often do not contain loop information. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



79 



08/25/99 





MusyA Audio Tools 



Adding Samples 

To add (import) a sample to your project, first expand the “Object Pool” 
folder by clicking on the “+”-symbol. 




Select the “Samples” folder: 



1 C:\Program Files\Factor5\MusyX\bin\testproject\testproject.mxp 



ii§ Groups 
Object Pool 
iil Sounds 
[■ Si Layers 
£j Keymaps 
: 1 Soundmacros 
U Tables 
CJ Samples 



Name j ObjectlD | References/! nfos 



N View ► 
New im 



Then go to the right side of the project window and double-click in an area 
without text, or press the right mouse button, and select "new" from the 
resulting pop-up menu. Don't double-click on an existing sample (in the 
list), because you will edit that sample, instead. 



08/25/99 



80 








iMaiimba.wav 



& Demo_Samples 



Directoiie-.: 



; Groups 
Object F'ool 

■ 'O Sounds 

■ Q Layers 
■Q Keymaps 

i j Soundmacw 

__j Tables 
t3 Samples 



Walk Throuah 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



08/25/99 



This will bring up a window with some SoundMacro-templates. For our 
“Marimba.wav”-Sample we can use the “Oneshot” Template. 



Before we can use the Sample as a sound, we have to create a 
SoundMacro. 



Select the Sample “Marimba.wav” from the Directory “Demo_Samples” of 
your AfwsyX Folder and click the OK-Button. Now the Sample has been 
imported into the project. 



A Very Simple SoundMacro (SMaL Program) 



Starting with a Sample, the smallest building block in this context, the 
easiest way to create a Sound Macro is using a “Template”. “Templates” 
are nothing more than predefined SoundMacros. 



Click [right mousebutton] on the “Marimba.wav” Sample and select 
“Templates” from the appearing pop-up menu. 








Audio Tools 



Now we have created a SoundMacro that plays our Sample. To see what 
this SoundMacro looks like: Select the SoundMacros Folder in the Object 
Pool and open the SoundMacro-editor by double-clicking on the 
marimba_oneshot1 .mxm Object. 



JC Soundmacroeditor — 1, maimiba_oneshoLmxm 



0 t-- j STAR TRAMPLE ‘ ^ |l~ r| >anr | iba. | .'vav 









BHI 


ill™ 








-Tsshe= : 












•iit 


■a 








sB 




HI 






§1® 




Wsk \ ^^sailiigemS i s. ■ v ' 








•: ::: : : ■ 

Mil 

: Step: 0, Command-ID 



To actually play this sound we need to tell the system when to use it. Here 
we are going to set the sound up to be used as an instrument. 

Hence the next step is to define a song group. 



08/25/99 



82 






Walk Through 




Defining a SongGroup 

To create a SongGroup click [right mousebutton] on the “Groups” folder in 
the Project window and a pop-up menu appears. Select “New 
Folder/Group“. 



To edit the new SongGroup double-click on its name and it will open the 
Properties window. Inside the Properties window you have to enter our 
new SoundMacro into the “Soundlisf. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



08/25/99 






Properties — Testpioject.mxp. Songgroup 



Information Soundist j .Dramchannel | : 



PRG-Na, GM-Name 



2, Bright Piano 

3, Electric Piano 

4 . Honky-T onk Piano 

5, Rhodes Piano 

6, Chorused Piano 



Harpsichord 



10, Glockenspiel 

11, Music Box 

1 2 , Vibraphone 

13, Marimba 

1 4, Xylophone 



The Soundlist is used to map SoundMacros or other Objects, Keymaps or 
Layers for example, to a MIDI program-number that can be accessed by 
MIDI program-changes. The names beside the numbers on the left side 
are only shown as a reminder for General MIDI purposes. More detailed 
information about the Soundlist is coming up in a later chapter. 



Next double-click on the blank field below “Object name”, of row No 1 . A 
dialog box is shown with different types of Objects from the “Object Pool”. 




Open the “SoundMacros” Folder and choose the new 
“Marimba_Oneshot1”-Soundmacro. Click Ok. 



08/25/99 



84 




Walk Through 



Playing the Instrument for the First Time 

The SongGroup is now ready to be sent to the Slave. Select the 
SongGroup and click the right mousebutton to open a pop-up menu. 
Choose “Send to slave” and all data belonging to this SongGroup will be 
transferred to the Soundslave. 




[If Testproject-mxp 



1-' I Marimba Oj 



After the transfer is completed you can play your first instrument using 
your sequencer and MIDi-keyboard. Make sure that your sequencer is set 
to the right MIDI-output and channel 1 . 



You can also play the instrument using the virtual MIDi-keyboard window 
inside MusyK. See later chapter for details. 



X Midi-Keyboaid 



Channel:1 Velocity: 1 2? Keynumbec 48 



(24) C2 (36) C3 (48) C4 (68) C5 (72) 

MnujyiiiJLMXj 




©1999 Factors LLC 08/25/99 

85 










Audio Tools 



Recording a Sequence 

Use your favorite MIDI-sequencer to record a short sequence with the new 
sound, using the slave program as synthesizer. 

Save the finished Sequence as a MIDI-file (*.mid) into the Midifiles-folder 
of our Testproject. 



Testpfojecl 




sni 


File Edit View Help 


Keyrnaps Layers 


i Midifiles 




Samples Soundmacro 


u 

Tables 




V fg 

macrodef.mxd Testproiect. 






8 ob|ect($! 


392TB 


■ . 



Switch back to the MusyK Editor. Open the Properties window of the 
SongGroup and click [left mousebutton] on the panel called 
“Songs/Midifiles”. Assign the Midifile to the Midisetup by double-clicking on 
the midifile field or by clicking on the “Browse Midifile” button. 



I wsfr. S-www&ty 



ItwWi 









A regular File dialog box appears. Here you have to change the directory, 
select your *.mid sequence that you recorded earlier, and click “Open”. 
Your sequence is now attached to the SongGroup and you can close the 
Properties window. 

Attaching midifiles to a SongGroup is not necessary as long as you work 
only with the slave, but it must be done before we convert the data for the 
game. Otherwise, the converter will not be able to find any midifile to 
include into the final data. 



08/25/99 



86 




Walk Through 



Looped Midi-files 



Midifiles can be played like samples as oneshot (meaning only once) or 
they can be looped, if you do not want to loop the whole sequence or if 
your music contains a pause at the end before it starts from the beginning, 
you need to define two custom controllers inside your MIDI sequence. 

These controllers determine, between them, the start and the end of the 
loop. 

Controller 102 marks the left locator position or start of the loop. 

Controller 103 marks the right locator position or end of the loop. 

Controller 104 marks a position from where certain actions are possible, 
e.g. fading out, or beginning one song while the one playing is faded out. 
This controller makes it easier for the programmer who needs to combine 
various Midifiles in a game. Due to this controller, he does not have to 
worry about finding the exact right spot from where to fade out for 
example. 

The values of the controllers are ignored for now, but should be kept zero. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



87 



08/25/99 




MaSfM, Audio Tools 

Defining a Sound Effect 

Sound effects (SFX) can be designed by importing a sample into your 
project and creating a SoundMacro, just the way you would create any 
instrument. The only difference is that unlike instruments, SFX are 
organized in so-called SFX-Groups. In these Groups you can edit a list of 
special settings for creating a SoundMacro. 

Import the Sample “Gunshot.aif from the Samples Directory (MusyX\GM- 
Set\GM-Set_44100\Samples\SFX) and create a SoundMacro using the 
Oneshot-Template. This is done exactly the same way you did the 
“Marimba” Sound. 

Now create a new Group using the Groups pop-up menu. Logically, this 
time you select “SFX-Group” instead of a SongGroup. 




Open the SFX-Group by doubie-clicking on its name and add the new 
SFX to the list. Use the pop-up menu [right mousebutton] to add a new 
entry first. Then double-click on the empty field under “Macro” and choose 
the “Gunshot_Oneshot.mxm” from the following dialog box. (This is the 
same procedure you followed in the SongGroup properties.) 







Walk Through 



Close the Properties Window and send the SFX-Group to the slave the 
same way you did the SongGroup. 

How to Test a Sound Effect 

After having sent the SFX-Group to the Slave, you can now easily play the 
SFX from the virtual MIDI-keyboard. The keynumber now represents the 
FX-ID, so you have to move the scrollbar of the MIDI-keyboard Window to 
the left to reach the appropriate key. 

Every MIDI channel consists of 128 IDs, meaning that 128 different sound 
effects can be played at once. Since there is a total of 16 MIDI channels, 
you can directly test 2048 sound effects. 



Saving Your Work 

To save your Project select “Save” from the Project menu. 



Finish! 

The next step would be to convert the project using the external Mus/K 
commandline tools. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



89 



08/25/99 



Additional Tools 



Additional Tools 



The Table Editor 

The Table-object is an additional database that the user can prepare for 
specific SoundMacro-commands. These can access the table to obtain 
large amounts of data quickly and conveniently. Tables can only be 
referenced by specific SoundMacro-commands. 

Tables can be used as curves for scaling the volume or to define ADSR 
Envelopes. 

To create a new table, double-click on an empty space in the Tables 
directory. Then type in a name of a non-existing file. This will create the 
table. Next, double-click on the table to enter the table editor. 



Using the Table Editor 

To open the table editor, select the tables folder from the project window. 
Then right-click in the right view window and create a new table. Open the 
new table by double-clicking on its name in the right view window. 

The table editor displays the data in 16 columns. By entering a new value 
in the length-field on the bottom right, the length of a table can be changed 
anytime. 




©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



91 



08/25/99 





MusyS. Audio Tools 



To change the data in a table, simply select the field using the mouse or 
the cursor keys and enter a value. The numerical Input and Output can be 
changed from the pop-up menu [right mousebutton]. 

Refer to the musician’s reference of the SMaL language description 
concerning the use of tables in SoundMacros. 

Using the ADSR Envelope Editor 

If the length of a table equals 8 bytes exactly, you can access the ADSR 
section of the Table editor. This is the most common use of tables. Set the 
table length to 8, using the "length" option at the bottom of the Value 
Editor. 

Here you can edit Attack, Decay, Sustain, and Release either by typing 
the values into the appropriate fields or by dragging the lines of the 
graphic display. The scale slider can be used to scale the graphical 
appearance of the Envelope. 




abb 1 3L 



Drag this line to 
change the Release 



Drag here for both 
Decay and Sustain 



08/25/99 



92 







The MIDI Setup Window 



The MIDI Setup Window 



What is the Purpose of this Window? 

The MIDI setup is used to pre-set MIDI-programs, volumes, panning and 
other data for all 16 channels. This is comparable to the multimode setup 
of a Synthesizer. Every SongGroup of a project can contain several MIDI- 
setups, one for each song in this SongGroup. 



How to Use the Window in Everyday Work 

If you open the properties of a SongGroup you’ll find a sub-window called 
“MIDI-setups/Songs”, where you can add, remove and edit MIDI-setups. 
To open the MIDI setup window double-click on the name of the setup or 
use the “Edit” button, on the right side. 








1 26 


11 


42 


50 


32 


17 


47 


78 


1 


49 


104 


103 


~n 

OO 


1 


"j 




0 0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


EM 


0 0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


0 


l 


34 45 


JJ 


.*'8 


51 


64 


92 


60 


82 


64 


69 


52 


87 


80 


64 


64 


ng*K 


87 m 


127 


1 00 


104 


86 


126 


127 


102 


127 


113 


50 


115 


103 


127 


127 



127 



0 

Chan.: 1 2 

6PM; jl 20 000 



r r r rvr 



r 



r i r 



8 3 11 12 



13 14 15 16 

Get from slave j 



The Importance of the Window when Exporting Data 

A MIDI-setup can be exported as simple data or as a MIDI standard file. 
This file can be used to import a setup into a MIDI sequencer. 



©1999 Factors LLC 



93 



08/25/99 




MusyX Audio Tools 



Using Multiple MIDI Setups within One SongGroup 

Each SongGroup can contain an unlimited number of Songs and MIDI 
Setups. 

Please read also about looping Ml Dl-files in the section, “Recording a 
Sequence” of the Walkthrough. 



08/25/99 



94 



The Virtual MIDI Keyboard 



The Virtual MIDI Keyboard 

Why a Virtual Keyboard? 

If you want to test a sound but you have no real MIDI keyboard connected, 
you can use the virtual keyboard. 

In addition, it can help you check key numbers when building Layers or 
Keymaps. 



Using the Keyboard 

When you move the mouse pointer over the virtual keyboard window the 
arrow will change into a hand. On the status bar above you can see the 
key number of the key where the hand is currently pointing. 

Clicking the left mouse button on one of the keys sends this note to the 
slave. Clicking the right mouse button opens a pop-up menu where you 
can change the setup of the keyboard parameters. 




©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

95 








UsyX Audio Tools 



Testing Sound Effects 

One of the virtual keyboard’s main purposes is to allow for quick tests of 
sound effects. 

Sound effects are mapped to the keyboards - both the virtual and the 
physical one - the moment you send a SFX group over to the slave. The 
method in which they are mapped is both simple and effective. 

First the key number and the MIDI channel are used to calculate the ID of 
the sound effect that is to be started. Once the ID is determined, the 
sound effect will be started. 

The first seven bits of the ID represent the key number, bits eight to 
eleven the MIDI channel. 

Every MIDI channel consists of 128 IDs, meaning that 128 different sound 
effects can be played at once. Since there is a total of 16 MIDI channels, 
you can directly test 2048 sound effects. 



Limitations in Comparison to a Real Keyboard 

The disadvantage of a virtual keyboard is that the user cannot play real 
music. Since only one key at a time can be pressed, there is no 
polyphony. 

In addition, no controllers are available and the virtual keyboard cannot 
send MIDI commands to a sequencer. 



08 / 25/99 



96 




The Network Master Window 



The Network Master Window 



What can be Controlled Using this Window? 

The Network Master Window is used as a remote and displays status 
information about the Slave. 



The Buttons and Fields: 



Connect Establishes a connection and resets the Slave 
Panic Resets all “hanging” voices on the Slave if needed 

Disconnect Break the connection to the Slave 
Voices Sets the maximum amount of Voices the Slave should 
play at once. 



What Kind of Information is Displayed? 

On the left side of the window, information about memory is displayed. 
You are informed about the available memory on the Slave system, about 
the space used by all sent objects and about remaining free memory 
space. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



97 



08/25/99 





Data Conversion 



Data Conversion 



General 

MusyK stores its data in a platform-independent and easy-to-work-with set 
of files. This format is not suitable to be used at runtime on the target 
platform. This is the reason why the data has to be converted before it can 
be used in the game application. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



99 



08/25/99 




What the Musician has to do to Prepare the Data 

The first step is to export the current project structure in a form that the 
command-line-based converter tools can understand. The so-called “script 
file” must be generated by the musician before handing the whole project's 
data structure over to the programmer. 




Select the “Generate script file for export” item from the “Project” pull down 
menu. 




A dialog box will appear that lets you select the name for the script file. If 
no extension is specified, .TXT will be added. 

You are now ready to hand the whole project directory over to the 
programmer. 

At the same time the musician should specify to the programmer which 
groups should be used at what time in the game application. 



08/25/99 



100 







Data Conversion 



The Actual Data Conversion 

There are two tools needed to convert the data. 

GM2SONG.EXE is used to convert MIDI-1 files to the song file format 
used on the target platform. 

MUCONV.EXE is used to convert all other data. This program even calls 
GM2SONG.EXE. Because of this we will have a closer look at 
MUCONV.EXE, only. GM2SONG.EXE must be in a location where it can 
be executed, but the user of MusyK will never come into direct contact 
with it. 

In addition to a so-called description file (see below for details) and the 
export scripts defining the projects to be used as source, the tool can 
accept the following options. 



MUCONV will generate an include file for easy reference to all IDs 
generated by the conversion process. By default the file will be written 
using C-syntax. You may use the -a option to write the file in assembler 
syntax instead. 



This option switches between little endian and big endian number 
representation. By default big endian is used (N64). 



-p <path> 

If the tool is not invoked from the project directory itself you may use this 
option to specify a search path for referencing all files from the project. 
This may be useful if you specify more than one project to be jointly 
converted. This option may be used multiple times and will add a search 
path to the search path list each time. 



-t <sys> 

This switch selects the target system for which the data should be 
converted. Be aware that this option does not set the appropriate endian 
mode on its own. Supported values for <sys> currently are either N64 or 



GB. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

101 



08/25/99 




M usyM Audio Tools 



-s 

Use this switch to disable the sample conversion step. If your project 
contains a lot of samples converting them may take a little while. You can 
avoid this by skipping this conversion step. You have to make sure 
though, that none of the samples have changed since you did the last 
complete conversion. 

-d 

Some platforms (e.g. N64) support different compression schemes. This 
switch causes MUCONV.EXE to always use the default sample format no 
matter what the musician specified in the tool. 



Tip: 

On the N64, there are two formats supported: 16-Bit RAW and ADPCM 
compressed. The latter is the default format and should be used most of 
the time since the quality is usually very high and it imposes less 
performance overhead on the system. 



Enables the verbose mode. You’ll get detailed information about every 
conversion step. 



Example: 

For a simple N64 project to be converted you may specify a command line 
like this: 

MUCONV -b -t N64 script.txt your.desc 

You may specify multiple export scripts and search paths as source. All 
specified projects will be joined together and converted as one big project. 

The description file may reference groups from all projects as if they were 
inside a single project. Be careful to avoid identical names across projects, 
though. This will cause the linking process to fail. 

This feature can be used to allow a musician and a sound effects designer 
to work separately and still use both data sets as one big project in the 
game application. 



08/25/99 



102 






Data Conversion 



The Description File 

An important part of the information needed to do the data conversion 
comes from the “desc” or “description” file. This file specifies all 
parameters needed in addition to the project data to generate the final 
output files. 

The file is divided into sections. A title line that looks like this marks each 
section: [section name] 



Each line within the section specifies one parameter. Some sections just 
accept one parameter, some accept multiple parameters. The following is 
a list of sections and their parameters. 



[project] 

This section contains a case-sensitive list of all group names that should 
be included into the proj file. 



[pool] 

This section contains a case-sensitive list of all group names that should 
be included into the pool file. 

[sampledir] 

This section contains a case-sensitive list of all group names that should 
be included into the sdir file. 



[samples] 

This section contains a case-sensitive list of all group names that should 
be included into the samp file. 

[outdir] 

This section just contains one parameter. It specifies the output directory 
where all files produced by the tool will be stored. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 

103 



08/25/99 



JWllSyX Audio Tools 



[basename] 

The base name, specified in this section, will be used to store all files 
except the song files and the include file. The section only contains one 
parameter. 



[include] 

The parameter of this section specifies the complete name of the include 
file to be written. The file will be stored in the output directory. 



[stack] 

This section contains the names of all the groups that should be taken into 
consideration for being in the “sound stack”, while considering which data 
is to be included in the various files (please see Programmer’s 
Reference). 



It is necessary to specify the groups that are to be included in each output 
file. 

For example: 

One could try to save memory by simply putting all groups into the project 
file, while all other files just contain subsets of the data. 

Together with the [stack] section it is possible to load only those files 
containing the groups really needed in a certain situation. In this case the 
[stack] section is used to tell the tool which groups to assume to be in the 
stack and in which order. 

Multiple calls to the tool with different description files can now be used to 
generate all needed files. 

Although this tool provides all these possibilities, in most cases you will 
not be forced to go to such extremes to generate your data. The simplest 
way is to include all needed groups in each output file and to skip the 
[stack] section all together. 

Once you have edited the description file and selected the proper options, 
you are ready to start the tool. 

It will produce four files that contain the project data and any number of 
song files that contain the data needed by the sequencer to playback the 
songs. 



08 / 25/99 



104 




Data Conversion 



The files in the first group of files will all have the same base name, but 
different extensions. Here is a list of extensions and the type of data 
contained in the files. 



PROJ 

This file contains all data about the structure of the project. This includes 
the information concerning what belongs to which group. 



POOL 

The pool file contains all data except the samples. This includes, for 
example, all macros needed by the specified groups. 



SDIR 

This file contains information about the location of all samples needed by 
the specified groups. The actual data is stored separately to make it 
possible to put it wherever the hardware allows. It may be stored in RAM 
where the CPU can reach it, but it may also be left in the ROM. 



SAMP 

This file contains the actual sample data in the format needed on the 
target platform. 



Once you have all these files converted you are ready to use them on your 
target platform. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 

105 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



Musyk Sample Program for N64 

A complete Mu&tfk project can be found in the "MusyX\example" 
directory. You will need to run the "Setup_Example.bat" file to copy the 
necessary libraries for your development environment. Supported 
environments are IRIX (5. 3/6. 2) and PC (Partner and SN 64). 

The project directory is located in MusyX\Example\Data\Project. 

To run the MUCONV data converter, use the makedata.bat file located in 
MusyX\Example\Data. 

Sample output files (.proj, .pool, .sdir, .samp) are already located in 
MusyX\Example\Data\output. 



08 / 25/99 



106 





N64 Musicians Reference 



Appendix 1 - N64 Musicians Reference 



Table of Contents: 

Appendix 1.1 = N64 Macro Commands 109 

END 110 

Structure Macros Ill 

STOP Ill 

SPLITKEY 112 

SPLITVEL 113 

WAIT_TICKS 114 

LOOP 115 

GOTO 116 

WAIT_MS 117 

PLAYMACRO 118 

SENDKEYOFF 119 

SPLITMOD 120 

SPLITRND 121 

TRAP_KEYOFF 122 

UNTRAP_KEYOFF 123 

IF_EQUAL 124 

IF_LESS 125 

Sample Macros 126 

STARTSAMPLE 126 

STOPSAMPLE 127 

Volume Macros 128 

SETADSR 128 

SCALEVOLUME 129 

ENVELOPE 130 

FADE-IN 131 

Pitch Macros 132 

PORTLAST 132 

RNDNOTE 133 

ADDNOTE 134 

SETNOTE 135 

LASTNOTE 136 

VIBRATO 137 

PITCHSWEEP1 138 

PITCHSWEEP2 139 

SETPITCH 140 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 1: 107 





Audio Tools 



Control Macros 141 

PIANOPAN 141 

PANNING 142 

KEYOFF 143 

Special Macros 144 

ADDAGECOUNT 144 

SETAGECOUNT 145 

SENDFLAG .....146 

REV_LEVEL 147 

SETPRIORITY 148 

ADDPRIORITY ....149 

AGECNTSPEED 150 

AGECNTVEL 151 

AD D_ VARS 152 

SUB_VARS 154 

MUL_VARS ..155 

DIV_VARS 156 

ADDLVARS 157 

SET_VAR 158 

Setup Macros 159 

PORTAMENTO 159 

PITCHWHEELR 160 

VOL_SELECT 161 

PAN_SELECT 162 

PitchW_SELECT 163 

ModW_SELECT 164 

PEDAL_SELECT 165 

PORTA_SELECT 166 

REVERB_SELECT 167 

SPAN_SEL 168 

DOPPLER_SEL 169 

SETUP_LFO .....170 

Appendix 1.2 - N64 Macro Templates 171 

?_ONESHOT 172 

?_LOOPED 174 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 108 



N64 Musicians Reference 



Appendix 1.1 - N64 IVlaero Commands 



This part contains descriptions of all Macro Commands used by AU/syX. 
for the Nintendo64. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 109 



08/25/99 




\V$yA Audio Tools 



END 

End of the Macro 



$00 


END 














— 



Description: 

This is always the last macro command. It cannot be deleted from the 
macro. It terminates the macro permanently. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 110 






N64 Musicians Reference 



Structure Macros 

STOP 

Similar to END, but can be used as a return command 
Type: Structure 



| Return flag j 


$01 


STOP 


mode 













Description: 

If mode is set to zero, this macro command has the same functionality as 
END. In contrast to END, it can be placed anywhere in the macro. If 
mode is set to a non-zero value, the macro will not be terminated and 
macro execution will continue from the last used GOTO command. 

Parameters: 

mode = Return flag ( 0 = on, 1 = off ) 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 111 



08/25/99 






Audio Tools 

SPLITKEY 

Splits the macro flow depending on the midikey 
Type: Structure 



Keynumber SoundMacro ID SoundMacro step 




Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the current key is higher than or equal to 
the key parameter. 

Parameters: 

key = This parameter ( 0-127 ) specifies a key number to compare 

against. If the key you play is higher or the same as this key, the 
macro will jump, otherwise it resumes. 

macro = The ID of the macro to jump to 

step = The step number inside the macro to jump to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 112 






N64 Musicians Reference 



SPLITVEL 

Splits the macro flow depending on the velocity 
Type: Structure 







Velocity 


SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step 


$03 


SPLITVEL 


velocity 


macro 


step 







Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the current velocity is higher than or equal 
to the velocity parameter. 

Parameters: 



velocity 




Specifies the velocity to compare the current velocity against. 
If the current velocity is higher or the same, the macro will 
jump, otherwise it will resume. 


macro 


= 


The ID of the macro to jump to 


step 


= 


The step number inside the macro to jump to 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 113 



08/25/99 




Mu$yK Audio Tools 

WAIT_TICKS 

Wait, depending on different conditions 
Type: Structure 



Keyoff Random Sampleend ms switch Ticks/millisec. 



$04 WAIT_TICKS key I random I sample I ms flag I time 

___[ release end 

Description: 

The execution of the current macro will be suspended until the given time 
is elapsed. By default, the time is specified in ticks. If the ms flag is set 
the time will be specified in ms. Independent from the selected time 
format a value of $FFFF (65535) will cause an endless wait. 

If one of the other flags is set, execution will resume as soon as one of 
the corresponding conditions becomes true or the time given has 
elapsed. 

Key release Wait until a keyoff is sent to the macro 
Sampleend Wait until the sample has reached its end 

Random The time will be used as a maximum to generate a 

randomized delay 

Parameters: 

key release = If this flag is set, the macro will resume after a keyoff is received 

random = If this flag is set, the macro will resume after a random time is 

elapsed. In this case the ticks/millisec. parameter defines the 
maximum wait time 

sampleend = If this flag is set, the macro will resume when the sample 
reached its end (this works only with oneshot samples) 

ms flag = This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

Ticks/Millisec. = The wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 114 







N64 Musicians Reference 



LOOP 

Loop back to a macrostep 
Type: Structure 







Keyoff 


Random 


Sampleend 


SoundMacro step 


Times 


$05 


LOOP 


key 

release 


random 


sample 

end 


step 


| times 



Description: 

Loop to the specified location within the current macro n-times. If one of 
the flags is set, the loop may be executed fewer than the specified 
number of times. A value of $FFFF (65535) will cause an endless loop. 



Key release 
Sampleend 
Random 


Loop until a keyoff is sent to the macro 
Loop until the sample has reached its end 
The number of loops will be used as a maximum to 
generate a randomized counter 


Parameters: 




key release = 


If set to on and a keyoff is received the command will not loop 
but proceed with the next step in the macro 


Random = 


If set to on the command will loop random times, where the times 
parameter specifies the maximal count of loops 


sampleend = 


If set to on the command will not loop when the sample reached 
its end (this works only with oneshot samples) 


step = 


This defines the macrostep, to which the command loops 


times = 


The number of loops to be performed. A times value of 65535 
will cause an endless loop, if none of the other conditions apply. 



int: Loops cannot be nested! 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 115 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 

GOTO 

Jump to another macro 
Type: Structure 







SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step ! 


$06 


GOTO 




Macro 


Step 







Description: 

Performs an unconditional jump to the specified location. Note that 
command $01 STOP, has the option to jump back to the position after 
the GOTO command. This can be used to create a sub-macro. 

Parameters: 

macro = The macro ID to jump to 

step = The step inside the specified macro to jump to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 116 





N64 Musicians Reference 



WAIT_MS 

Wait, depending on various conditions 
Type: Structure 







Keyoff 


Random 


Sampleend 


Millisec. i 


$07 


WAIT_MS 


key 

release 


random 


sample 

end 






ms 



Description: 

The execution of the current macro will be suspended until the given time 
has elapsed. By default, the time is specified in ms. A value of $FFFF 
(65535) will cause an endless wait. 

If one of the other flags is set, execution will resume as soon as one of 
the corresponding conditions becomes true or the time given has 
elapsed. 



Key Release Wait until a keyoff is send to the macro 
Sampleend Wait until the sample has reached its end 

Random The time will be used as a maximum to generate a 

randomized delay 

Parameters: 



key release 
random 



sampleend 



ms. 



If this flag is set, the macro will resume after a keyoff is received 

If this flag is set, the macro will resume after a random time has 
elapsed. In this case the ticks/millisec. parameter defines the 
maximum wait time 

If this flag is set, the macro will resume when the sample 
reached its end (this works only with oneshot samples) 

The wait time specified in milliseconds 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 117 



08/25/99 




MiMfM Audio Tools 



PLAYMACRO 

Starts another macro 
Type: Structure 



j Addnote SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step 


Priority 


Max Voices 1 


$08 PLAYMACRO addnote macro 


step 


priority 


maxVoc. 



Description: 

Starts another macro in parallel to the current one. Since it will be started 
like any other macro, the normal delays etc. apply. The macro will be 
passed the priority and the maxVoc. value specified. The key is 
calculated by adding addnote to the original key of the macro starting the 
new one. The new macro may be started at any macrostep, using the 
step parameter. See also command $09 SENDKEYOFF. 

Parameters: 



addnote 

macro 

step 

priority 

maxVoc. 



A keyshift or transpose value (-128 to 127) can be added 
to start the new voice with a different note. 

The ID of the new macro to start 

The step inside the new macro to start 

Defines the priority of the new voice 

The maximum count of voices that this new macro can allocate. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 118 







N64 Musicians Reference 



SENDKEYOFF 

Send a keyoff to the specified macro 
Type: Structure 







Addnote 


SoundMacro ID j 


$09 


SENDKEYOFF 


addnote 


macro 











Description: 

Send a keyoff to the specified macro. Since the macro is only identified 
by its ID and the key value, which is calculated by adding the parameter 
addnote to the original key of the current macro, multiple macros may be 
found. In this case, the keyoff is sent to all macros encountered. This 
command is mainly used to signal a midi-keyoff to other previously 
started macros by the PLAYMACRO command. 

Parameters: 

addnote = Please see the description of the PLAYMACRO command 
macro = The ID of the macro that will receive the keyoff 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 119 



08/25/99 






MtJSyX Audio Tools 



SPLITMOD 

Splits the macro flow depending on modwheel 
Type: Structure 



■ r - 


Mod value 


SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step 1 


$0A SPLITMOD 


mod. 


macro 


step 



Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the current modulation value is higher than 
or equal to the mod. parameter. 

Parameters: 

mod. = This defines the point where the split occurs (0-127) 

macro = The ID of the macro to jump to 

step = The step number inside the macro to jump to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 120 






N64 Musicians Reference 



SPLITRND 

Splits the macro flow depending on a generated random value 
Type: Structure 



■ 


RND value 


SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step 


$13 SPLITRND 


rnd 


macro 


step 



Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the generated random value is higher than 
or equal to the rnd parameter. 

Parameters: 

rnd = The higher this value is, the less is the chance that the jump will 

be performed 

macro = The ID of the macro to branch to 

step = The step number inside the macro to branch to 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 121 



08/25/99 






MusyX Audio 

Tools 



TRAP_KEYOFF 

Registers a jump destination in a macro if a keyoff occurs 
Type: Structure 




Description: 

Registers a jump destination in a macro if a keyoff occurs. 

Parameters: 

macro = The macro ID to jump to 

step = The step inside the specified macro to jump to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 122 







N64 Musicians Reference 



UNTRAP_KEYOFF 

Remove a key off trap 
Type: Structure 




Description: 

Removes a previously registered keyoff trap. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 123 



08/25/99 







My$y2‘ A uc jjo Tools 



IF_EQUAL 

Goto MacroStep if condition is true 
Type: Structure 



Ctrl ’J|§= Ctrl B Not Sound Macro Step 



$70 I F_ EQUAL VarICtrl A VarICtrl B Not MacroStep 



Description: 

If the condition is TRUE, the execution of the SMaL program will be 
continued at MacroStep. A jump outside the current macro is not 
possible. The condition evaluated is a simple comparison of the values of 
variables A and B. If the Not field is “Off’, the condition is TRUE as soon 
as both values are identical. If Not is set to “On”, the condition is TRUE if 
both values are not equal. 

For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 

Parameters: 



Var/Ctrl 

A 

Var/Ctrl 

B 

Not 

MacroStep 



Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller A 

Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller B 
logical not 

MacroStep number to jump to inside the current macro 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 124 







N64 Musicians Reference 



IF_LESS 

Goto MacroStep if condition is true 
Type: Structure 





Ctrl 


A< 


Ctrl 


B 


Not 


Sound Macro Step lj 


$71 IF_LESS 


Var/Ctrl 


A 


Var/Ctrl 


B 


Not 


MacroStep 



Description: 

If the condition is TRUE, the execution of the SMaL program will be 
continued at MacroStep. A jump outside the current macro is not 
possible. The condition evaluated is a simple comparison of the values of 
variables A and B. If the Not field is “Off”, the condition is TRUE as soon 
as A < B is satisfied. If Not is set to “On”, the condition is TRUE if A >= B 
is satisfied. 



For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 

Parameters: 



Var/Ctrl 

A 

Var/Ctrl 

B 

Not 

MacroStep 



Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller A 

Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller B 
logical not 

MacroStep number to jump to inside the current macro 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 125 



08/25/99 




- Audio Fools 



Sample Macros 

STARTSAMPLE 

Start a sample 
Type: Sample 





Sample-ID 


Vel. Scale 


Sample Start Offset 


$10 STARTSMP 


smpID 


Mode 


Offset 



Description: 

Starts the sample playback of the sample specified by smpID. An offset 
inside the sample may be specified, but is not supported on all hardware 
platforms. (Startsample playing from offset is not supported under Game 
Boy.) If it is supported, it is always specified in samples, not bytes. If no 
ADSR was previously specified, a standard ADSR will be used, that 
avoids click-sounds as much as possible but starts & stops the sample 
almost immediately. 



Parameters: 




smpID = 


The ID of the Sample to be started 


mode = 


0=apply offset directly, 

1=scale offset with negative velocity (higher velocity results in 
smaller offset), 

2=scale offset with positive velocity (higher velocity results in 
higher offset) 


offset = 


The offset in sample-units. If mode = 1 or 2 the offset defines the 
maximal range 



Hint: Use an ADSR with at least 1 ms fade-in time or the FADE1N command 
with 18ms fade time to avoid clicking if you use the offset function! 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 126 








N64 Musicians Reference 



STOPSAMPLE 

Stops the sample playback immediately 
Type: Sample 





$11 


STOPSAMPLE 

















Description: 

Stops the sample playback immediately by sending a keyoff and setting 
the ADSR to a very short release time. Click-sounds will be avoided as 
much as possible. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 127 



08/25/99 




MlVSfjl Audio Tools 

Volume Macros 

SETADSR 

Hardware ADSR Envelope 
Type: Volume 



I Table-ID (ADSR) 


$0C SETADSR 


Table 













Description: 

The data from the specified table will be used to define an ADSR to be 
used with the voice. The editor presents a graphical edit dialog to define 
tables containing the needed data. 

Parameters: 

table = This references the ID of the table that contains the ADSR 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 128 






N64 Musicians Reference 



SCALEVOLUME 

Scales the velocity passed to the macro by the sequencer or the effect 
handler to calculate a new volume for the current voice 

Type: Volume 



$0D SCALEVOLUME Scale Add 



Table-ID (Curve) Org Vol. 



curve 



org. vet 



Description: 

Calculates a new volume for the current voice by scaling the velocity. 
The velocity is either passed to the macro by the sequencer (via midi) or 
the effect handler. A scale of 127 equals 100%. Smaller values scale 
down and larger scale up. In addition to the simple scale, an offset can 
be specified in the ‘add’ parameter. The result of this calculation can be 
passed through a curve that will act as a translation table. A value of 
zero in the curve parameter will disable this feature. The new volume is 
calculated either using the current velocity (Org.Vel = 0) or the original 
velocity (Org.Vol = 1). 

Parameters: 



scale 


— 


The scaling factor of the velocity 


add 


= 


A fixed offset can be added to the volume 


curve 


= 


This is a table ID of a volume translation curve (CMinear) 


org.vel 


= 


If this switch is set to on the original velocity (when the macro 
was started) is used instead of the current velocity/voiume 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 129 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



ENVELOPE 

Starts a software envelope 
Type: Volume 



Scale Add Table-ID (Curve) ms switch Ticks/Millisec. 




Description: 

Starts a software envelope. The velocity of the current macro will be 
faded to the new one, in the time specified by the ticks/ms parameter. If 
the ms flag is set, ms will be used instead of ticks. The new volume is 
calculated just as described in SCALEVOLUME. The volume sweep may 
be of lower quality than the hardware ADSR. 

Parameters: 

scale = The scaling factor of the velocity 

add = A fixed offset can be added to the velocity. Clipping is applied if 

the result exceeds 127 

curve = This is a table ID of a volume translation curve (0=linear) 

ms flag = This switches the following parameter from ticks to milliseconds 

ticks/ms = Specifies fade time in either ticks or milliseconds 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 130 






N64 Musicians Reference 



FADE-IN 



Starts a software fade-in envelope 



Type: Volume 




Description: 

Starts a software fade-in envelope. The velocity of the current macro will 
be faded from zero to the new one in the time specified by the ticks/ms 
parameter. If the ms flag is set, ms will be used instead of ticks. The new 
volume is calculated just as described in SCALEVOLUME. The volume 
sweep may be of lower quality than the hardware ADSR. 



Parameters: 



scale = The scaling factor of the velocity 

add = A fixed offset can be added to the velocity. Clipping is applied if 

the result exceeds 127 

table = This is a table ID of a volume translation curve (CMinear) 

ms flag = This switches the following parameter from ticks to milliseconds 

ticks/ms = Specifies fade time in either ticks or milliseconds 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 131 



08/25/99 




\3Zy^ Audio Tools 

Pitch Macros 

PORTLAST 

Not implemented yet 
Type: Pitch 





Add 


Detune 


ms switch Ticks/Millisec. 8 


| $1 6 PORTLAST 


— 


— 


— 



Description: 

Not implemented yet. 

Parameters: 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 132 







N64 Musicians Reference 



RNDNOTE 

Sets random pitch 
Type: Pitch 





Note Lo 


Detune 


Note Hi 


Fixed/Free 


$17 RNDNOTE 


note-lo 


detune 


note-hi 


fix/free 



Description: 

Sets random pitch. Note-lo is the lower end of the range, note-hi the 
upper end. The detune value will be added after the random pitch is 
calculated. It is specified in cents. If the fix/free flag is set, the pitch will 
be generated freely inside the range without respect to any key steps. If 
rel/abs is set, the note-lo parameter specifies how many keys below the 
current key the range should start, while note-hi defines the size of the 
upper range. 



Parameters: 

note-lo 

detune 

note-hi 

fix/free 



Lower end of the range 

Applies a detune after the note is calculated 

Upper end of the range 

OFF = the random pitch is quantized to note values 
ON = the pitch is calculated freely within the range 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 133 



08/25/99 




mvsyj. Audio Tools 



ADDNOTE 

Recalculates the current pitch by adding keysteps to the current key 
Type: Pitch 





Add 


Detune 


Org Key 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. i 


$18 ADDNOTE 


add 


detune 


org.key 


ms flag 


ticks/ms 



Description: 

Recalculates the current pitch by adding add keysteps to the current key 
(or original key, if the Original Key flag is set to on) and applying the 
detune value in cents. The add parameter is a signed value. The last two 
parameters are zero by default. If they are a non-zero value they will be 
used as in WAIT, to suspend the execution of the current macro for a 
given time interval. 

Parameters: 



add = 

detune = 

org.key = 

ms flag = 

Ticks/Millisec. = 



This can be used to transpose the midi-key to a new note 
A detune of +/-99 cent can be applied 

If set to on the original midi-key is used to calculate the new pitch 

This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

A wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds. If 0 the macro 
proceeds directly to the next step 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 134 








N64 Musicians Reference 



SETNOTE 

Sets note by a fixed key 
Type: Pitch 





Key 


Detune 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. 1 


| $1 9 SETNOTE 


key 


Detune 


ms flag 


tickslms 



Description: 

Calculating a new pitch by setting the current key to the new value 
specified by key. After this, the detune specified in cents will be applied. 
The last two parameters are zero by default. If they are a non-zero value, 
they will be used as in WAIT, to suspend the execution of the current 
macro for a given time interval. 

Parameters: 



key = 

detune = 

ms flag = 

Ticks/Millisec. = 



A fixed key in the normal midi key range (0-127) 

A detune of +/-99 cent can be applied 

This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

A wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds. If 0 the macro 
proceeds directly to the next step 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 135 



08/25/99 






Audio Tools 

LASTNOTE 

Adds note to last note on current channel 
Type: Pitch 





Add 


Detune 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. | 


$1A LASTNOTE 


add 


detune 


ms flag 


ticks/ms 



Description: 

Recalculates the current pitch/key by adding add keysteps to the last key 
played on this MIDI (!) channel and applying the detune value in cents. 
The add parameter is a signed value. The last two parameters are zero 
by default. If they are a non-zero value they will be used as in WAIT, to 
suspend the execution of the current macro for a given time interval. 

Parameters: 



add = 

detune = 

ms flag = 

Ticks/Millisec. = 



This can be used to transpose the midi-key to a new note 

A detune of +/-99 cent can be applied 

This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

A wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds. If 0 the macro 
proceeds directly to the next step 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 136 






N64 Musicians Reference 



VIBRATO 

Adds a vibrato to the voice currently used to play the macro 
Type: Pitch 





Level note Level fine Modwheel flag 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. | 


$1C VIBRATO 


Level levelfine mod. 


ms flag 


tickslms 



Description: 

Adds a vibrato to the voice currently used to play the macro. Vibrato 
means that the pitch is modulated by a triangular waveform with a period 
specified by ticks. If the ticks/ms flag is set, the period is given in ms 
instead of ticks. A period of zero will disable the vibrato. The number of 
keysteps that it should go up or down gives the amplitude of the 
waveform. The level parameter is a signed value. If it is negative the 
pitch offset will go down first. If it is positive the offset will go up first. 
levelfine is specified in cents. If the mod. flag is set to on, the values from 
the modulation wheel will be used to scale the vibrato. "Off' disables any 
scaling by controllers. 

Parameters: 



level 


— 


This is the level in note-steps (+/-12) 


levelfine 


= 


The fine level (+/-99 cents ) 


mod. 


= 


On = Scale the level with the modwheel controller 


ms flag 


= 


This switches the following parameter from ticks to milliseconds 


ticks/ms 


= 


Specifies period time in either ticks or milliseconds 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 137 



08/25/99 






MusyJ Audio Tools 



PITCHSWEEP1 

Add a sweep to the pitch 
Type: Pitch 



1 Times 


Add 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. S 


$1D PitchSWEEPI Times 


Add-value 


ms flag 


tickslms 



Description: 

Adds the add-value n-times to the current pitch. After this, the action 
starts again at the original pitch. To stop the effect, set add to zero. The 
last two parameters are zero by default. If they are a non-zero value, 
they will be used as in WAIT, to suspend the execution of the current 
macro for a given time interval. There are actually two commands of this 
kind (PITCHSWEEP1 & PITCHSWEEP2). They work independently from 
each other and combine to perform very nice effects, if used 
simultaneously. 

Parameters: 



Times = 

Add-value = 

ms flag = 

Ticks/Millisec. = 



This defines how many frames the add-value will be applied 

The value to be added to the pitch per frame 

This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

A wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds. If 0 the macro 
proceeds directly to the next step 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 138 







N64 Musicians Reference 



PITCHSWEEP2 

Add a sweep to the pitch 
Type: Pitch 



| Times 


Add 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. 1 


$1E PitchSWEEP2 Times 


Add-value 


ms flag 


tickslms 



Description: 

Adds the add-value n-times to the current pitch. After this, the action 
starts again at the original pitch. To stop the effect, set add to zero. The 
last two parameters are zero by default. If they are a non-zero value, 
they will be used as in WAIT, to suspend the execution of the current 
macro for a given time interval. There are actually two commands of this 
kind (PITCHSWEEP1 & PITCHSWEEP2). They work independently from 
each other and combine to perform very nice effects, if used 
simultaneously. 

Parameters: 



Times = 

Add-value = 

ms flag = 

Ticks/Millisec. = 



This defines how many frames the add-value will be applied 

The value to be added to the pitch per frame 

This flag switches the mode of the time parameter 

A wait time specified in ticks or milliseconds. If 0 the macro 
proceeds directly to the next step 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 139 



08/25/99 







MwSfA Audio Tools 



SETPITCH 

Sets the pitch directly 
Type: Pitch 





Frequency in Hz 


Fine i 


$1 F SETPITCH Hz(24bit) 


(fine) 





Description: 

Sets the frequency to be used to playback a sample, directly. The fine 
parameter is not supported by all platforms, since most platforms do not 
have a fine resolution in selecting the playback frequency (10Hz steps 
are common). 

Parameters: 

Hz = The coarse frequency in Hz (0-88200) 

fine = A fine resolution parameter (0-65535) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 140 







N64 Musicians Reference 



Control Macros 

PIANOPAN 

Piano stereo panning 
Type: Control 





Scale 


Centerkey 


Centerpan j 


$0B PIANOPAN 


scale 


cen.key 


cen.pan 



Description: 

This macro command is especially designed to give instruments like a 
piano a naturalistic stereo behavior. The current key will be used to 
calculate a panning position. First, the key is converted to an offset by 
subtracting the cen.key. Next, the scale is applied. A scale of 127 will 
give you the full range, while a scale of 0 will eliminate any offset. Finally, 
the cen.pan is added. This last value can be viewed as the position of 
the instrument in the room. Since the final values may exceed the normal 
panning range, illegal values are clipped. A negative scale will invert the 
stereo panorama. 

Parameters: 

scale = This scales the range of the panning 

cen.key = This defines the middle key of the panning 

cen.pan = An offset of the panning range 



©1999 Factors LLC 



Appendix 1: 141 



08/25/99 





knj$yJ. Audio Tools 



PANNING 

Sets the panning to be used with the macro 
Type: Control 





Pan position Time ms 


Width ii 


$0E PANNING 


pan.pos Time 


width 



Description: 

Sets the panning to be used with the macro. If no panning is specified, 
the default center panning will be used. The pan.pos parameter specifies 
the position (0=Left, 64=Center, 127=Right). The time and width 
parameters enable an automated pan-sweep. The panning will move 
from the current location to the new one specified by the signed offset 
within time ms. If these parameters are zero, the new panning will be set 
immediately. 

Parameters: 

pan.pos = like midi-panning (0-127), where 0 is totally left, 64 is center and 

127 is totally right 

time = Auto panning slide time 

width = An offset to the pan position to which the auto panning slides to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 142 







N64 Musicians Reference 



KEYOFF 

Sends a keyoff to the currently used voice 
Type: Control 



$12 


KEYOFF 






r- 


= 






rn 



Description: 

Sends a keyoff to the currently used voice, but does not change the 
ADSR. This command should be used instead of STOPSAMPLE, to 
finish sample playback if any ADSR has been set. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 143 



08/25/99 




Mut/~ Audio Tools 

Special Macros 

ADDAGECOUNT 

Add a value to the age-counter 
Type: Special 





ADDAGECOUNT 




add 


— 






— 



Description: 

Adds a signed number to the age-counter of the current voice. This 
allows customized priority handling. 

Parameters: 

add = Signed value to be added to the age-counter. In order to make a 

voice “older” a negative value has to be added (-32768 to 32767) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 144 







N64 Musicians Reference 



SETAGECOUNT 

Set age-counter 
Type: Special 



Counter j 


$31 


SETAGECOUNT 




counter 











Description: 

Directly sets the age-counter of the current voice. This allows customized 
priority handling. 

Parameters: 

counter = This sets the age value (0-65535). The lower the value, the older 
the voice 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 145 



08/25/99 




Mvsfd Audio Tools 



SENDFLAG 

Sends a flag to the game program 
Type: Special 







Flag-ID 


Value 


$32 


SENDFLAG 


num 


value 











Description: 

Sends a flag to the game program. This feature is used mainly to signal 
certain events to the game program. After startup, the values are all 
zero. There are 16 values. 

Parameters: 

num = The flag ID (0-15) 

value = The number to be set (0-255) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 146 





N64 Musicians Reference 



REV_LEVEL 

Set reverb level 
Type: Special 







Scale 


Add 


$34 


_ i 
LU 
> 
LLI 
_l 

>' 

LU 


scale 


add 













Description: 

Sets or scales the reverb level for the current voice. If the reverb effect 
engine is enabled, all voices are passed through this engine with a send 
level defined by midi controller 91 (Effectl Depth) or as predefined by the 
reverb setting in the midi-setup of each MusyX-song. The scale and add 
parameter can be used to change or override those settings. This is 
especially useful for drum kits, where each drum may need a different 
reverb level. If both values are 0, the reverb engine is bypassed for the 
voice currently used so that, e.g. a base drum can be kept "dry". 

Parameters: 

scale = Scales the reverb level of the current midi channel 

add = Adds a fixed value to the scaled reverb level 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 147 



08/25/99 




Jiil®pX Audio Tools 



SETPRIORITY 

Directly sets the priority 
Type: Special 



Priority 



$36 SETPRIORITY prio 

Description: 

Directly sets the priority. This allows customized priority handling. 

Parameters: 

prio = Sets the priority of the current macro 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 148 






N64 Musicians Reference 



ADDPRIORITY 

Adds a value to priority 
Type: Special 



Add 


$37 ADDPRIORITY 


add 











Description: 

Adds a signed number to the priority. This allows customized priority 
handling. 

Parameters: 

add = A signed number to be added to the current priority 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 149 



08/25/99 






AflusyX Audio Tools 



AGECNTSPEED 

Sets age-counter speed 
Type: Special 



Time until Zero 



$38 AGECNTSPEED Time 



Description: 

Changes the speed by which the age-counter is decremented. By default 
the counter will reach zero after about 18 minutes. The time value sets 
the time in milliseconds the counter will need to decrement to zero from 
its current value. If Time is set to zero, the priority counter will not be 
changed over time at all. 

Parameters: 

time = The time (0-1080000) in milliseconds to reach 0 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 150 





N64 Musicians Reference 



AGECNTVEL 

Sets the age-counter using velocity 
Type: Special 



j Age Base 


Age Scae 




$39 AGECNTVEL AGE Base 


AGE Scale 





Description: 

Sets the age-counter of the current voice, calculated from a base number 
and the midi velocity. This allows customized priority handling. 

Parameters: 

AGE Base = The age base value (0-65535) 

AGE Scale = The scaling factor for the velocity (0-65535) to be added 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 151 



08/25/99 





Audio Tools 



AD D_ VARS 

Add variables 
Type: Special 





Ctrl 


A= 


Ctrl 


B+ 


an 


o S 


$60 AD D_ VARS 


Var/Ctrl 


A 


Var/Ctrl 


B 


Var/Ctrl 


C 



Description: 

The current values of variable B and C are added together and stored in 
variable A. The Var/Ctrl switches select whether a variable or a controller 
should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On”, the corresponding value 
index is used as an extended controller number. 

Parameters: 

Var/Ctrl = 

A 

Var/Ctrl 
B 

Var/Ctrl 
C 

About variables: 

All variable-handling commands can work with extended MIDI controllers 
and variables. Variables are referenced by specifying a number that 
identifies the variable to be used. There are local and global variables. 
While local variables are just accessible from the current macro and are 
initialized to zero each time the macro is started, global variables can be 
accessed by all macros and even the application program. They are just 
initialized to zero when the system is initialized. 

Local variables are identified by indices 0 to 15, while indices 16 to 31 
specify global variables. 

All types of variables - including controllers - are handled as 16-bit 
signed values. All operations are saturated, meaning that results of 
mathematical operations are clipped against the maximum and minimum 
values. 



Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller A 

Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller B 

Controller C switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller C 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 152 







N64 Musicians Reference 



When writing to or reading from controllers, one must be aware that all 
controllers are handled as 14-bit values, even if they are just 8-bits in 
size. For example, a MIDI volume of 127 would be represented as 16256 
(127*128). This is done so that generalized routines can be written 
without having to watch out for all the different MIDI controller sizes. 

The 14-bit value is always used as an unsigned quantity. E.g. a neutral 
pitchbend position would be 8192, not zero. 

All extended MIDI controllers with the exception of the two LFOs may be 
written to, external MIDI data may overwrite these values at any time, 
though. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 153 



08/25/99 



Mu$yX Audio Tools 



SUB_VARS 

Subtract variables 
Type: Special 




Description: 

The current value of variable C is subtracted from variable B and the 
result is stored in variable A. The Var/Ctrl switches select whether a 
variable or a controller should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On” 
the corresponding value index is used as an extended controller number. 

For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 

Parameters: 

Var/Ctrl = Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

A = Variable / Controller A 

Var/Ctrl = Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

B = Variable / Controller B 

Var/Ctrl = Controller C switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

C = Variable / Controller C 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 154 







N64 Musicians Reference 



MUL_VARS 

Multiply variables 
Type: Special 





Ctrl A= 


Ctrl 


B 


Ctrl 


c i 


| $62 VAR_MUL 


Var/Ctrl A 


Var/Ctrl 


B 


VarICtrl 


c 



Description: 

The current values of variable B and C are multiplied and the result is 
stored in variable A. The Var/Ctrl switches select whether a variable or a 
controller should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On”, the 
corresponding value index is used as an extended controller number. 

For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 



Parameters: 



Var/Ctrl 


— 


Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 


A 


= 


Variable / Controller A 


Var/Ctrl 


= 


Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 


B 


= 


Variable / Controller B 


Var/Ctrl 


= 


Controller C switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 


C 


= 


Variable / Controller C 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 155 



08/25/99 





Mu$y/* Audio Tools 



DIV_VARS 

Divide variables 
Type: Special 




Description: 

The current value of variable B is divided by the value of variable C and 
the result is stored in variable A. The Var/Ctrl switches select whether a 
variable or a controller should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On”, 
the corresponding value index is used as an extended controller number. 

For details about variables see ADDJVARS. 

Parameters: 

Var/Ctrl = Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

A = Variable / Controller A 

Var/Ctrl = Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

B = Variable / Controller B 

Var/Ctrl = Controller C switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 

C = Variable / Controller C 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 156 






N64 Musicians Reference 



ADDLVARS 

Add immediate value 
Type: Special 



Ctrl A= Ctrl B+ Imm 



$64 ADDLVARS VarICtrl A Var/Ctrl B Immediate 



Description: 

The immediate value is added to the value of variable B and the result is 
stored in variable A. The Var/Ctrl switches select whether a variable or a 
controller should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On”, the 
corresponding value index is used as an extended controller number. 

For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 

Parameters: 



Var/Ctrl 

A 

Var/Ctrl 

B 

Immediate 



Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller A 

Controller B switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 
Variable / Controller B 
Immediate value to add to B 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 157 



08/25/99 





A*l/sy>. Audio Tools 

SET_VAR 

Set variable to immediate value 
Type: Special 



$65 SET_VAR 



Var/Ctrl 



Jem 

\A 



Immediate 



Description: 

The current value of variable A is replaced with the specified immediate 
value. The Var/Ctrl switch selects whether a variable or a controller 
should be accessed. If the switch is set to “On”, the value index is used 
as an extended controller number. 



For details about variables see ADD_VARS. 



Parameters: 






Var/Ctrl 


= 


Controller A switch (OFF = Variable, ON = extended controller) 


A 


= 


Variable / Controller A 


Immediate 


= 


16 bit value (0-65535) to be stored in A 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 158 







N84 Musicians Reference 



Setup Macros 

PORTAMENTO 

Sets portamento mode and time 
Type: Setup 



| Port. State Port. Type 


ms switch 


Ticks/Millisec. t 


$1B PORTAMENT. state type 


ms flag 


ticks/ms 



Description: 

Setup the mode for portamento operation. If state equals zero, 
portamento will be disabled, while 1 enables it. A value of 2 keeps the 
state unchanged. By default, portamento is controlled by the MIDI 
portamento controller (65). The time parameter controls the time needed 
to reach the current key. By default, this is 500ms. Type defines the type 
of portamento function desired. Zero performs portamento only if the last 
key is still depressed, while 1 performs it all the time. A legato function 
can be achieved by setting the time parameter to zero. 



Parameters: 

mode state = 
type 

ms flag = 

ticks/ms = 



0=off, 1=on, 2=midi controller 65 controls off/on 

0=enable portamento when the last key is held, and while the 
new key is pressed. 1=portamento is always active. 

This switches the following parameter from ticks to milliseconds 

Specifies portamento time in either ticks or milliseconds 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 159 



08/25/99 






*' * v - * Audio Tools 

PITCHWHEELR 

Sets the number of keysteps used to calculate the pitchwheel range 
Type: Setup 







Range up 


Range down j 


$33 


PITCHWEELR 


rng up 


rng dwn 













Description: 

Sets the number of keysteps used to calculate the pitchwheel range. The 
size of the lower and the upper range can be selected separately. The 
default value is two keysteps for both ranges. 

Parameters: 

mg up = The positive range in key steps 

mg dwn = The negative range in key steps 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 160 






N64 Musicians Reference 



VOL_SELECT 

Adds a volume calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode [ 


$40 VOL_SELECT 


Ctrl 


scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the volume calculation. The first use 
of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the new 
component. All further calls add additional components. A comb value of 
0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and the new 
values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


= 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-10000 to 10000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0- front, 127=surround) 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 161 



08/25/99 








. - Audio Tools 



PAN_SELECT 

Adds a panning calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode { 


$41 


PANLSELECT 


Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the panning calculation. The first 
use of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the 
new component. All further calls add additional components. A comb 
value of 0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and 
the new values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 




The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-1 0000 to 1 0000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFQ macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127=surround) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 162 










N64 Musicians Reference 



PitchW_SELECT 

Adds a pitchwheel calculation component 
Type: Setup 





MIDI Contr. Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode 


$42 PitchW_SELECT 


Ctrl Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the pitchwheel calculation. The first 
use of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the 
new component. All further calls add additional components. A comb 
value of 0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and 
the new values. 

Parameters: 

Ctrl = The MIDI controller number 

scale = A signed scaling factor (-1 0000 to 1 0000) 

Ctrl = 0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 

controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



1 ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitch bend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127=surround) 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 163 



08/25/99 






MusyK Audio Tools 



ModW_SELECT 

Adds a modulation wheel calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode 


$43 


ModW_SELECT 


Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the modulation wheel calculation. 
The first use of this command resets the default values to empty and 
adds the new component. All further calls add additional components. A 
comb value of 0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old 
and the new values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


= 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-10000 to 10000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0- front, f 27 -surround) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 164 









N64 Musicians Reference 



PEDAL_SELECT 

Adds a pedal calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage Combine uCode 1 


$44 


l— 

o 
111 
— 1 
LU 

m 

i 

_i 

< 

Q 

LU 

Q. 


Ctrl 


Scale comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the pedal calculation. The first use 
of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the new 
component. All further calls add additional components. A comb value of 
0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and the new 
values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


= 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-1 0000 to 1 0000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP LFQ macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127=surround) 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 165 



08/25/99 





■i my.’. Audio Tools 

PORTA_SELECT 

Adds a portamento calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode j 


$45 


PORTA_SELECT 


Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the portamento calculation. The first 
use of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the 
new component. All further calls add additional components. A comb 
value of 0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and 
the new values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


— 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-10000 to 10000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



1 ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127=surround) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 1: 166 








N64 Musicians Reference 



REVERB_SELECT 

Adds a reverb calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine uCode j 


$46 


REVERB_SELECT 


Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the reverb calculation. The first use 
of this command resets the default values to empty and adds the new 
component. All further calls add additional components. A comb value of 
0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and the new 
values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


— 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-10000 to 10000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127=surround) 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 167 



08/25/99 







MusyX Audio Tools 

SPAN_SEL 

Adds a surround panning calculation component 
Type: Setup 



1 MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine Mode 1 


$47 SPAN_SEL Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 



Description: 

Selects an additional component for the surround panning calculation. 
The first use of this command resets the default values to empty and 
adds the new component. All further calls add additional components. A 
comb value of 0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old 
and the new values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


= 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-10000 to 10000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0- front, 127=surround) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 168 







N64 Musicians Reference 



DOPPLEFLSEL 

Adds a reverb calculation component 
Type: Setup 







MIDI Contr. 


Scale Percentage 


Combine Mode \ 


$48 


DOPPLER_SEL 


Ctrl 


Scale 


comb 









Description: 

Selects an additional component for the doppler calculation. The first use 
of this command resets the default values to empty, and adds the new 
component. All further calls add additional components. A comb value of 
0 sets the value, 1 adds the value and 2 multiplies the old and the new 
values. 

Parameters: 



Ctrl 


= 


The MIDI controller number 


scale 


= 


A signed scaling factor (-1 0000 to 1 0000) 


Ctrl 


= 


0 = set value from defined controller, 1 = add value to current 
controller assignment, 2 = multiply the old and the new controller 



You may use all standard MIDI controller numbers. In addition, the 
following extensions have been defined: 



ExCTRL 


Function 


128 


Pitchbend (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


129 


Aftertouch (since there is no controller in the MIDI standard) 


130 


LFOI (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


131 


LF02 (see SETUP_LFO macro command) 


132 


Surround Panning (0= front, 127 -surround) 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 169 



08/25/99 








iBtyX Audio Tools 

SETUP_LFO 

Sets up LFO characteristics 
Type: Setup 







LFO Nr. 


Period in ms I 


$50 


SETUP_LFO 


num 


period 











Description: 

Enables or disables the specified LFO. A value of zero as period will 
disable the LFO. From that point on it will continue to produce the last 
value as a constant. The LFO always starts at center level, unless it 
already was active. Num specifies which LFO should be setup. Currently 
two LFOs (0,1) are supported. 

The LFOs always swing through the full amplitude. Use the scale 
parameter when combining them, using the x_SELECT macro 
commands to control the amplitude. 

Parameters: 

num = The LFO number to be set (0 or 1) 

period = The period time of one LFO cycle in milliseconds 

The following table shows how the two LFOs can be accessed in 
combination with any of the x__S ELECT macro commands 



ExCTRL 


Function 




LFOI 


131 


LF02 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 170 






N64 Musicians Reference 



Appendix 1.2 - N64 Macro Templates 

This part contains descriptions of the Macro templates used by MusyVL 
for the Nintendo64. The descriptions for the templates are based upon 
the content of the first template. So, to understand the various aspects of 
programming in SMal, you should read the descriptions in order. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 171 



08/25/99 




•fK Audio Tools 



?_ONESHOT 

Template for starting a simple oneshot sample 



%. Soundmacroeditoi — 


2. snare. 


drum_oneshot mxm 








HI 


m 


•-V, i : T • fs 


i 


m'ywsimm 


:■ ’"T- ; 
ilM 


WKS&3- ISMIl 


Wimm 


— iHI 




■ H.i- -v s ' : ■ -,y : . V Ml 


ij® SllS 


'Sample-IC 




vej 








— 3 


ST 

T ( . ' J ‘Jig 




1 


Si— 


y: : .y 


■MS 




ipSSIlS 






W>Sm 


to 


San 


HUNS 








Wxh - jBplM 

ti". ^ ai— 1 


_ 

Mfi 




p— 


& 


S— — — 


mimes 
















m ■ 


torinBi 




' EE 1 ill 


^ . 


— 


lfeL£i 


— 


rr-wsm.^ 








B ■ ■ il 


I- ’ I 

iBB 


It 


n 


1 






— — 


H 



Description: 

This short SoundMacro is an example of how to get a simple oneshot 
sample working. It may also work even with just 2 commands: 
STARTSAMPLE and END. But one has to understand the underlying 
priority and voice allocation scheme in order to build a correct 
SoundMacro. 

The dynamic-voice-allocation of MusyK is a very important part of the 
system and understanding how it works help to produce better results. A 
voice in MusyH uses a priority from 0-255 and the so-called age counter 
(0-65535) to determine their importance. Please refer to “Dynamic Voice 
Allocation", on page 14 of the MusyA Manual, for a detailed description. 



Step by Step: 

Assume that this SoundMacro is properly set to the desired midichannel 
and ready to play. If the slave now receives a midi-on command (a note 
is played from a connected midikeyboard or a midi-sequencer), the slave 
searches for a (free) voice and execution of the SoundMacro starts at 
step 0. 

However, before the first command is executed, there are some basic 
settings made by the init-routine. The frequency of the voice will be set to 
the note received by midi. The volume of the voice will be calculated 
using the midi-velocity and the channel volume. The priority will be set as 
defined in the Soundlist and the age-counter will be set to 60000 
(decimal). 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 172 







N64 Musicians Reference 



Step 0: 

The first command to be executed is STARTSAMPLE, which is of course 
used to start the sample. The first parameter of this command is the 
Sample-ID referencing our desired sample (in this case a snare drum). 
The “Vel scale" and “offset" offer a nice option to start the sample with an 
offset (measured in samples), which can be scaled to the beginning of 
the sample using the velocity. This can provide instruments of different 
attack styles depending on the velocity and helps to give some sounds a 
more natural feel. If the offset is 0, this option is disabled. Since 
STARTSAMPLE has no wait parameter, the execution continues 
‘virtually’ in real-time. 



Step 1 : 

The second command (WAIT) is a part of the priority and voice allocation 
scheme mentioned earlier. The “Millisec." parameter regularly defines in 
milliseconds how long the execution of the macro is to be stopped. If set 
to the highest possible value 65535 (hex $FFFF), the sample will play 
continuously. 

Flowever, the execution of the SoundMacro will continue when one of the 
condition parameters (keyoff, random or sample-end) becomes ‘true’. In 
this case the command waits until the sample is finished. This is very 
important, because of the two following commands. 



Step 2: 

The next command (SETAGECOUNT) is used to set or reset the age- 
counter of the voice. Since the sample has played to the end and there 
are no other things to do in this SoundMacro, we can reset the age 
counter to 0 (oldest). Thus, a new midi-note can use this voice as soon 
as possible. This command also proceeds directly to the next and last 
command in our SoundMacro. 



Step 3: 

The END command is the last command in all SoundMacros and also 
resets the priority of the voice to 0. In this case, the voice is now totally 
free and can be used by any new midi-note, even one with a lower 
priority. 



Reset the age counter at the end of every SoundMacro and keep an eye 
on the voice bars appearing in the slave window. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 1: 173 



08/25/99 




J - If 

Audio Tools 



?_LOOPED 

Template for playing a looped sample 




Description: 

This is an example for a looped instrument. (The following explanation of 
the steps is based on the description of the first macro-template 
“?_ONESHOT” which you should have already read.) 

Step 0: 

The first command is, again, a STARTSAMPLE command. Since we 
have a looped sample (trumpet.aif) here it would play forever, so we 
have to take care of what to do after the midi-key is released. 



Step 1 : 

The WAIT_MS command this time is set to wait until the midikey is 
released. After the keyup is received, we want to stop the sample. But to 
get a more musical result, we decide to fade out smoothly before we stop 
the sample. 



Step 2: 

During the fade out we also want to give the voice more “age”, because it 
is not so important compared to voices that are still held. To do this we 
use the ADDAGECOUNT command, but with a negative value (-30000) 
because the lower the counter the older is the voice. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 1: 174 















N64 Musicians Reference 



Step 3: 

This command (Envelope) fades the volume of the voice to a new one, 
calculated from the midi-velocity using the “scale” and “add” parameter. 
Since both values are 0, the voice will be faded to 0 in the time given by 
the milliseconds parameter (1000ms or one second). 

Step 4: 

Here we have, again, a WAIT, but this time no condition is given and the 
milliseconds parameter is set to the same time like in the envelope 
command, before. So we can make sure that the next command will be 
executed just when the envelope fade is completed. 



Step 5: 

The volume is now 0 and the sample cannot be heard anymore. 
However the sample is still playing, so we should switch it off if we want 
to end this soundmacro. It is also recommended to do this because the 
mixing routine will be unburdened. 



Step 6: 

The same procedure as in our last macro. We set the age to 0 so that 
the voice is free. 



Step 7: 

End our macro. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 1: 175 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



APPENDIX 2- 

Game Boy Musicians Reference 

Table of Contents: 

An Introduction to Sound on the Nintendo Game Boy 179 

Appendix 2.1 - Game Boy Slave 183 

What is this Slave? 183 

Starting the Slave 184 

Working with the Slave 187 

Testing your Project with the Slave 191 

Exiting the Slave 192 

Appendix 2.2 - SlaveROMGenerator 193 

Creating a Slave ROM 195 

Appendix 2.3 - Game Boy Macro Commands 197 

END 198 

Structure Macros .199 

STOP 199 

SPLITKEY 200 

SPLITVEL 201 

LOOP 202 

GOTO 203 

WAIT 204 

PLAYMACRO 205 

KEYOFF 206 

SPLITRND 207 

TRAP_ KEYOFF 208 

UNTRAP_ KEYOFF 209 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 2: 177 



tisyJC Audjo T00 | S 



Voice/Sample Macros 21 0 

PLAYKEYSAMPLE 210 

SETVOICE 211 

STARTSAMPLE 212 

VOICEJDFF 213 

VOICE_ON 214 

SETNOISE 215 

PWM.START 216 

PWM_UPDATE 217 

PWM_FIXED 218 

PWM_VELOCITY 219 

WAVE_ON.. 220 

Volume/Pan Macros ....221 

SETADSR ....221 

SETVOLUME 222 

PANNING 223 

ENVELOPE ..224 

HARDENVELOPE 225 

Pitch Macros .226 

RESET.MOD 226 

STOP_MOD 227 

PORTLAST 228 

RNDNOTE 229 

ADDNOTE 230 

SETNOTE 231 

LASTNOTE 232 

PORTAMENTO 233 

VIBRATO 234 

PITCHSWEEP 235 

Special Macros........ 236 

SENDFLAG 236 

SAMPLEMAP 237 

CURRENTVOL 238 

ADD_SET_PRIO. 239 

Appendix 2.4 - Performance Issues 241 

Appendix 2.5 - Troubleshooting Guide.. 243 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 178 



Game Boy Musicians Reference 



An Introduction to Sound on the Nintendo 
Game Boy 

Since the Game Boy hardware is already ten years old, it can be 
considered rather old fashioned by today’s standards. Nevertheless it is 
possible to create surprisingly good sounds, if the sound artist is fully 
aware of the possibilities and the limitations of the Game Boy sound 
hardware. 

This appendix is meant to introduce you to what the Game Boy has to 
offer (and what not to expect). 

First, there is need to mention that the Game Boy and Game Boy Color 
sound hardware are identical. No improvements have been made to the 
Game Boy Color with respect to sound. 

Having stated this, we will refer to any kind of Game Boy hardware 
(including the traditional Game Boy, the Game Boy pocket and the Game 
Boy Color) as Game Boy. 

Note: Musy& for Game Boy does not provide support for the extended 
sound capabilities offered by Super Game Boy hardware. 

Game Boy sound hardware is comprised of 4 individual sound 
generators of three different kinds. Two of those four generators are 
identical in function with the exception of one special feature on one of 
them. 

The Game Boy programming manual calls the sound generators 
Soundl, Sound2, Sound3 and Sound4. To prevent confusion with the 
general understanding of what a sound is, we will continue to call them 
Voicel through Voice4. 

The three different kinds of sound generators are as follows: 

Voicel and Voice2 use rectangular wave patterns to create a sound. 
Voice3 uses a 32 4-bit sample long wave pattern to create sound. 

Voice4 uses a polynomial counter to create random noise. 

All four voices have a volume control that can, with the exception of 
Voice3, be set in 16 steps from mute (0) to maximum (15). Voice3 does 
not have the full range of volume control. It can be set only in 4 steps 
from mute (0) to 25%, 50% and 100% (3). There is also an envelope 
available in hardware for all but Voice3. Musy& however offers a more 
flexible envelope for all 4 voices in software. 



©1989 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 2: 179 





Audio Tools 



All voices, with the exception of Voice4, have a frequency setting that 
allows for sounds to be produced from 64Hz to 131kHz. Since Voice4 is 
a noise generator, it does not have such a setting. It can produce 
different kinds of frequencies by modifying the parameters of the 
polynomial clock. 

For Voicel and Voice2 you may choose from hardwired pulse widths for 
the rectangular wave pattern. It offers pulse widths of 12.5%, 25%, 50% 
and 75%. The latter is the equivalent of the 25% pulse width, but it is 
phase inverted. 

Voicel also offers a very limited pitchsweep function, which is NOT 
supported by MusyX.. Instead we offer 2 sophisticated pitchsweeps for 
each Voicel through Voice3 in software. 

Finally, each voice can be assigned to the left, right or both sound 
outputs individually. This selection allows for a wide stereo spectrum only 
(the sound is played back entirely on the left, right or on both). Smooth 
panning changes are not possible. 

The Game Boy sound hardware has just two flaws that are important to 
know and that unfortunately cannot be circumvented. 

Whenever a voice is started or stopped a clicking sound is produced. 

The intensity of it varies depending on the signal being output at the 
moment of the start or stop. 

Whenever a change in volume on a playing voice is requested, the voice 
needs to be restarted. This usually creates a slight clicking sound as 
well. 

MusyK. extends on the capabilities of the Game Boy and adds a few new 
features like extended sample playback and pulse-width modulation. 

Extended features fall into the categories of pitch and volume changes. 
To modify pitch for instance, M usyK adds features like vibrato, 
portamento, pitch sweeps, fixed pitches and random pitches for Voicel, 
Voice2 and Voices. 

Enhancements for volume controls are ADSR curves, envelopes, fade- 
ins and fixed volumes for all 4 voices. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 180 




Game Boy Musicians Reference 



New features are: 

> Velocity dependent selection of the rectangular wave pattern for 
Voicel and Voice2. 

> Pulse-width modulation of a rectangular wave pattern for Voice3 

> Velocity dependent creation of a rectangular wave pattern for Voice3 

> Playback of samples in two quality settings (normal and low) for 
Voice3 as music instruments or sound effects 

> Playback of samples in high quality using full CPU performance for 
introductory voice or music. 

In addition, the SMaL programming language offers control of the sound 
while it is playing in numerous ways with control commands like: wait, 
loop, goto, trap, split and more. 

To experience the possibilities of Musy&, listen to the provided example 
and see how each sound is achieved by examining its corresponding 
SMaL macro. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 181 



08/25/99 




08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 182 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Appendix 2.1 - Game Boy Slave 

What is this Slave? 

The slave program running on the PC communicates with the MusyK 
editor and the Game Boy slave running on Game Boy Color. 

It also receives MIDI data from a connected MIDI keyboard or the virtual 
MIDI keyboard in the MusyK editor. 

The slave is responsible for relaying all the data it receives to Game Boy, 
which will in turn produce sound. 

To do this you will need to connect a standard Game Boy Color to the 
PC running the slave program, via the supplied customized link cable. 
This cable plugs into the link port of Game Boy Color and any available 
printer port of the PC. 

The slave receives data from the AU/syX. editor using a network 
connection known as TCP/IP. This virtually enables any machine in your 
Local Area Network or even any machine on the globe, to serve as your 
sound slave. If you are planning to use the same machine to run both the 
slave and the editor, you still need to have TCP/IP installed and have 
both the editor and the slave refer to the same IP address. 

The slave receives MIDI data through a Windows MIDI device, usually a 
sound card with a built-in MIDI port. If you plan on using the same 
machine for the slave and your favorite sequencer program, you will 
need to connect a loopback plug to your soundcard's midiport, or install a 
so-called loopback device driver, which serves as a MIDI device to 
Windows. More on this later. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 183 



08/25/99 




isyM Audio Tools 



Starting the Slave 

The slave program is a Windows GUI executable, which has been 
installed on your system along with the MusyK editor. 

When you start the program, you will see a window similar to this: 




MusyX Win95/98 -Slave 



Program version 



llusyX Win 95/98 U0.63 - GameBoy (10:45:27 Mar 2 1999) 

(0)1996-99 Factor 5, LLC 
Written by Thomas Engel & Jens Petersam 
iFound 4 MIDI ini 



List of available 
MIDI devices^ 



degice(s) 



#0 : "Greatiue Labs Sound 81. 
#1 : "MIDI Yoke NT: 1" 

92 : "MIDI Voke NT: 2" 

#3 : "MIDI Yoke NT: 3" 

./■ i - - \'A opened. 

IWinSocket initialized: <WinSi 
Liste. n i.ng....f e c t i o n a : 
;ri27’. Q.0.1 <katie> : 7 08.'.....:: 



MIDI device used 
to receive data 



TCP/IP address, 
machine name & 
port number of 
this slave PC 



Link speed, available ROM samples & size of flash cart SRAM 



: "Greatiue 


_abs 


Sound Blaster 1.5"! 


: "MIDI 


Voke 


NT: 


1" 


: "MIDI 


Voke 


NT: 


2" 


: "MIDI 


Yoke 


NT: 


3" 



Note that the main window is divided into three sections: the main log, 
the Link status and the MIDI data. 

The Main Log 

This window holds all the information about the data received from the 
MusflL editor while you are working. Right after the start of the program, 
it will display system information, as seen above. 



Program Version: 

This displays the type and version of the slave you are currently 
running. Your version and build numbers are likely to be different 
from the example above. 



Available MIDI Devices: 

These lines enumerate all MIDI devices that can be used for input. 
The number of devices depends on your Windows installation and 
the MIDI devices you have installed on your system. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 184 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Used MIDI Device: 

This line tells you which MIDI device number, from the presented list 
of available devices, you are now using for input. This should be the 
setting you made in the slave configuration program. If you need to 
use a different input device, you must reconfigure the slave with the 
configuration program. 

TCPIIP Network Info 

This tells you the local IP and port address the slave program uses 
to communicate with the MusyX. editor. It also shows you the name 
of the machine on which you are running the slave. 

The IP and port numbers are the ones that you need to enter in the 
editors network options to have it communicate with this slave. 



The Link Status 

This window contains information about the current data link between the 
slave PC and the connected Game Boy Color. Initially it will display 
system information, as seen on the previous page. 

Link Speed: 

If the communication to the Game Boy Color can be established 
successfully, you can see here how fast the communication is taking 
place. This speed can drop, if during the course of transmitting data 
errors cause packets to be retried. Should the speed drop to below 
70% of the initial value shown here and the slave is idle for more 
than 30 seconds, it will try to reconnect to the Game Boy Color at a 
higher speed. 

Number of ROM Samples: 

Here, the number of samples that are registered in the Game Boy 
Color slave ROM is displayed. ROM samples become important 
when the internal RAM of Game Boy Color cannot hold all the 
samples your project requires. Please refer to "Data Conversion 
Tools" in the Programmers Reference, for more details about ROM 
samples. 

SRAM Size: 

This states how much SRAM is installed in the flash ROM that holds 
the Game Boy Color slave program. This number can be anything 
between OK and 128K in 16K increments. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 2: 185 




Audio Tools 



If you see the following error message instead of a successful 
connection message... 



j Link status 


Connecting to Game Boy... FAILED! 


— 






4 | | 


T'i /;<: 



... then the slave was not able to establish a link with Game Boy Color. In 
this case, please refer to the troubleshooting section at the end of this 
appendix. 



The MIDI Data Window 

This window shows ail incoming MIDI data from the MIDI device in their 
form, as 3 byte data packets. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 186 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Working with the Slave 

When you create your sounds, the moment will come when you want to 
test them on Game Boy. Before you can do this, you need to send your 
sound project to the slave program, which will process it and in turn 
transfer the data to the Game Boy itself. 

You initiate this process by highlighting the sound group (song group or 
sound effect group) you wish to test and choose "Send to slave" from the 
context sensitive pop-up menu: 

S' G 

- _J C 

_j 



The slave program will now receive all of this group's data and print it out 
in the main log. 



As soon as the slave program has received all data from the group, it will 
download it to Game Boy Color. This may take some time, depending on 
the established communication speed and the size of your project. 




You will see the line "Downloading project..." during the download phase, 
at the end of which a "done!" is appended if everything worked fine. 




©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 187 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



Here is an example of what it looks like when you transfer the supplied 
demo to the slave. 



Listening for a connection as 
127.0.0.1 <katie> : 700... 

Connection accepted. 

Clearing all data. 

Clearing all data. 

Receiuing current MIDI setup. 

Receiuing 8 bytes of macro data on id 5. 
Receiuing 64 bytes of macro data on id 18. 

Receiuing 40 bytes of macro data on id 19. 

Receiuing 80 bytes of macro data on id 6. 

Receiuing 88 bytes of macro data on id 20. 

Receiuing 24 bytes of macro data on id 16. 

Receiuing 40 bytes of macro data on id 17. 

Receiuing 32 bytes of macro data on id 15. 

Receiuing 56 bytes of macro data on id 7. 

Receiuing 120 bytes of macro data on id 11. 
Receiuing 80 bytes of sample data on id 11. 

Receiuing 80 bytes of sample data on id 10. 

Receiuing 784 bytes of sample data on id 7. 
Receiuing 1016 bytes of sample data on id 8. 
Receiuing 730 bytes of sample data on id 9. 
Receiuing 1480 bytes of sample data on id 6. 

Receiuing 8150 bytes of sample data on id 2. 

Receiuing 7190 bytes of sample data on id 4. 

Receiuing 8048 bytes of sample data on id 3. 

Receiuing 8162 bytes of sample data on id 1. 

Receiuing 8488 bytes of sample data on id 5. 

Receiuing song group data for id 9. 

Receiuing project name. 

Sending status information. 

Free project mem: 7039 bytes 
Free sample mem: 144560 bytes 



While the slave program is downloading data into Game Boy Color, a 
rotating transfer indicator on Game Boy signals you that a download is in 
progress. 




08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 188 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



The available size of memory will be displayed in two separate units in 
the main log (see the screenshot on the previous page). 

First, we have the available project memory. This is a fixed size chunk of 
memory, unaffected by any SRAM in the flash ROM, of 7424 bytes. 

It holds all the sound macros and ADSR tables. 

Second, we have an area of variable size, between 24 KB and 152 KB, 
depending on the amount of SRAM on the flash ROM that holds the 
Game Boy slave program. This area stores sound samples and is the 
one most likely to run out first. 

The usage of the sample RAM is also displayed in the Musy*. editor’s 
Network Master window: 



1 Network: Master 






Information about soundslave: 



Name 


value i 


State 


Sonq-Group 


Memory total 


1 55648 


Memory used 


11088 


Memory tree 


144580 


M axvoices 


0 



Connected 



33 



R eset 



Panic 



Di connect 



Maxvoices: 



When you are running out of sample RAM, you need to move some or all 
of your samples into ROM to clear some space. Your project can still use 
samples that have been moved to ROM. The difference is that they do 
not consume any RAM space, so you can continue to add more samples 
here. 

Please refer to, "Data Conversion Tools" in the Programmers Reference, 
for details on how to move samples to ROM. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 189 



08/25/99 








Audio Tools 



When you are sending a project to the slave repeatedly, you will see a 
line displayed in the Link status window like this. 



Link status 



Connecting to Game Bog OK! (1181 bytes/sec) 

Querying ROM sample list... OK! (0 ROM Samples found) 
Determining SRRM size... OK! (128 KB installed) 
Downloading project . . . done! — - 
Downloading project..:, no change! 'j 






To preserve time, the slave program keeps an internal backup of what it 
knows is already located in Game Boy. If it determines that the data is 
accurate it will not download anything to Game Boy. 

You are most likely to encounter this when you are actively working on a 
macro while trying out your changes. Some parameters of a macro 
command have a limited resolution in Game Boy, so sometimes a 
change you make will actually have no effect. 

The WAIT command is a good example. Its resolution is limited to 16.67 
milliseconds inside Game Boy, although you can enter any number you 
like. Because of this, values like 4,10 and 1 3 milliseconds will be 
rounded up to 16.67 and, even though you made a change to the macro, 
it does not make any difference to Game Boy. Since there is no change 
to download, you will be prompted with the above line, "no change!”. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 190 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Testing your Project with the Slave 

Once you have successfully downloaded a valid project into Game Boy, 
you can use your MIDI keyboard, sequencer program or the Musyfc 
virtual MIDI keyboard to test your sounds. 



Whenever the slave program receives either kind of MIDI data, it 
displays them in either the MIDI data window or the Main log, depending 
on the type of MIDI data (data from the virtual keyboard or from the 
sequencer). 



Mm da.fe trsri 
tm mrmi MIDI 














liftecjfiwifig 


nrfc-liiai 


Hill %h 


74. 




-i 


92 


l#tl 


"1. 


Receiyimt 


net -nail i 


m wi 


If . 






64 


56 


31 


In if 


net-MIi! 


m $2 


74 , 






%2 


UK 


Sri 






m 2f 


7f * 






§2. 






K (‘ CFMJiJI »| 


Set-tsIBI" 


m~zf 


If , 






ny 


tte 






imk-ma i 


m 


14 . 






82 


(Hi 


153 




net — whip I 


mi 


7? i 






tit 


w*> 


3D 




nctr-Him 


m tt 


74 . 






S3 


?t* 


44 


v Fteceisiiiiij 


net “Min I 


m 26 


f t *: 






83 


24 


*e 




imk-foiiil 


$8 i*,Kf 


W- 






£3 


?H 






azt-nmi 


f.fL4T 


7f . 






SO 


24 


3 b 


ffpceiy I.ni| 


t 


v ji m 


If * 








74 


Sr 


IIBE'Cr&iSiing; 




m 2s 


?f. 






t2 


07 


sm 


Hr.nineeti im. 


r 










m 


74 


4 b 














so 






JT h 








mpi; j ' it 


Jj 


80 


24 


4e 




— ““““ 






"■ — - • ' ■ 




ft?. 


3 dt 




■■SSI 










— 1 


SO' 


24 


31} 


:\ jmj 


to licmt* 


ttuy . . . 


U¥, 


T f 11311 iHft t» t S/5.t*C ) 


A'f 


83 


?6 


4b 


(kerumq Hurt sample 


list. 




Dili flOll Sanpies found) 




m 


26 


5e 


&*? t r>rpii n ittij XKfiM % izi/. . . 


M* 


1 *ot I ns-t Jilt'd) 






£6 




Dounlo jiliny project 


.... do 










t&l 


4D 



= 






MIDI data receive 
by 'Alndcvj 



As you feed MIDI data to the slave program it sends it to Game Boy, 
where it will be processed and a sound is created. 

When Game Boy receives MIDI data, the transfer indicator will rotate 
next to the line "Receiving MIDI" on the Game Boy display. 

Since MIDI data is very short compared to project data you download 
into the Game Boy, the transfer indicator will stay on screen longer for 
MIDI data than it does for project data, to give you a better visual 
feedback. 

NOTE: 

The slave program can only transfer one kind of data at a time. While 
project data is being downloaded, all incoming MIDI data is discarded. 
Downloading project data also takes precedence over MIDI data so, 
whenever you modify your project while your sequencer is sending MIDI 
to the slave, sound output will stop for the time of the project download. 
This is normal. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 191 



08/25/99 



MvwyX Audio Tools 



Exiting the Slave 

To close the slave program, click on the Windows X symbol in the upper 
right hand corner of the programs window. 

When you still have the AfwsyK editor running while closing the slave 
program, a window will pop up telling you that the slave program is no 
longer running. 






Soundslave has been disconnected! 



OK 



This can also occur when the link between Game Boy Color and the PC 
is severed. Possible causes are removing the link cable or switching off 
Game Boy. 

Another occurrence for this is bad communication between the PC and 
Game Boy. If too many errors occur in a short period of time and they 
can not be error-corrected, the slave program terminates itself. 

Errors usually occur due to line noise caused by radio interference in the 
link cable or by weak batteries in Game Boy. 

We recommend using an AC adapter rather than batteries to 
operate Game Boy Color, since the batteries are quickly exhausted 
when flash ROM is used (according to Nintendo, use of the new 
flash ROM with built-in Rumble Pak can cause batteries to be 
drained in as little as 1 hour). Using the serial link also increases 
the required current. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 192 




Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Appendix 2.2 - SlaveROMGenerator 

While creating music and sound effects for an application, there is 
always the possibility that Game Boy, which is used to preview the work, 
will run out of free memory. 

Usually this happens because the musician makes extensive use of 
samples. 

The other possibility is that the entire sound project data exceeds the 
available project memory, which is only 7.25KB in size. 

Should the latter occur, the only solution is for the musician to try and 
optimize his project, since the project cannot exceed this size restriction. 

The former problem can be remedied by "swapping out" the samples into 
ROM, which can hold many more times the samples than the internal 
RAM of a Game Boy Color, or by using a flash ROM with added built-in 
RAM. Flash ROM can provide up to an additional 128 KBytes of 
memory. The total of 152 Kbytes (128 extension together with the built-in 
Game Boy Color RAM) is now available for samples. 

Although using a flash ROM with RAM seems to be the most convenient 
way to work, moving samples into ROM offers the benefit of not needing 
to download them into Game Boy via the serial link. This can save you a 
lot of time. 

Moving samples into ROM is easy, too. We are providing a Windows 
GUI driven tool that allows the musician to take his project, as it is, and 
put all samples therein into ROM. 

After a couple of mouse clicks a new Game Boy slave ROM is created 
that contains the samples and only needs to be flashed on the existing 
flash ROM. 

Once installed in the Game Boy, the PC slave program will determine if a 
sample it received is already stored in Game Boy ROM. If it is, the newly 
received one will not be transferred. This identification process takes the 
length of the sample and a 32-bit CRC checksum into consideration. 

Thus the possibility that any new sample added to the project is 
accidentally believed to be in ROM (and therefore would not be 
transferred) is minimized. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 2: 193 





Audio Tools 



Sometimes a single sample exceeds the above mentioned 152KByte 
(usually the flash ROM available today have only 32 KByte on them, 
limiting the size of any one sample to 56 KByte). Locating a sample in 
ROM is then the only way for the musician to actually listen to the 
sample 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 194 




Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Creating a Slave ROM 

To create a new slave ROM with the samples currently in the sound 
project, you will need to create an export file from within the MusyX 
editor. This is the same procedure you would use if you wanted to 
convert your project for being built into the application. 

From the Project-menu choose "Generate scriptfile for export", enter a 
file name for the exported script and click the 'save' button. 

Now you need to start the SlaveROMGenerator tool (which has been 
installed in the same location as the MusyX editor). 



Lists ail groups in the 
exported project and 
allows for manual 
ex-inclusion of them 



Name of the export 
script file - 



Name of the new' 
slave ROM image 



| MusyX ROM Generator 



S^l«+TfrTOp54qi export 



nnm 

Open 



Asks for tie source 
export script 



X 



0 GroupseO \ 

0 Songgroup J 



Writes the new 
slave ROM image 



File Info;-- 

Project: C Agameboy '-.project txt 
. Rom Image: C:\gameboy\new_rlave.con-i 



- Exits the program 



This is what it looks like. 



Initially, there will be nothing displayed in the large white area and the 
"Save ROM" button will be disabled. 

What you need to do is click on the "Open" button and navigate, in the 
file dialog box that appears, to the export script you just created from the 
Mus/& editor. 

If the script file is correct, in the large group area you will be shown a list 
of all groups defined in the MusyK editor. In the above example, the 
project contains 2 groups. 

For your reference the name of the project script is shown at the bottom 
in the "File Info" box. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 195 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



All groups are pre-selected to be included in the new ROM image. If you 
do not want the samples of a particular group to be included, click on the 
groups corresponding checkbox to disable it. 

For the "Save ROM" button to become enabled, at least one group must 
be selected. 

After you have selected the groups you want to include, click on the 
"Save ROM" button to bring up a dialog box prompting you for a filename 
for the resulting ROM image. 

Note: 

• The file extension for a binary ROM image to be written with the 
Game Boy development system unfortunately is .COM, which is not 
to be confused with an MSDOS executable, even though the 
Windows explorer will call it as such. 

If for some reason the ROM file could not be successfully created, a 
popup dialog box will inform you. 

The name of the new ROM image will also be shown in the "File Info" 
box for your reference. 



Now you need to remove the flash ROM from your Game Boy. Flash the 
new ROM you just created on it and put it back in. You're all set. 



Note: 

• The next time you start the PC slave program, it will tell you how 
many ROM samples are installed in your flash ROM. 

• If you edit a sample that is located in ROM it will be downloaded into 
RAM again, since it has changed, and the ROM version will not be 
used. This ensures that you are always listening to the correct 
sample. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 196 




Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Appendix 2.3 - Game Boy Macro Commands 

On the following pages you will find a description of all Macro 
Commands used by MusyK for Game Boy and Game Boy Color. 



© 1999 Factors LLC 



Appendix 2: 197 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



END 

End of the Macro 
Type: Structure 



$00 END 


— 


— 


— 


' 






— 



Description: 

This is always the last macro command. It can not be deleted from the 
macro. It terminates the macro permanently. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 198 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Structure Macros 

STOP 

Similar to end 
Type: Structure 



$01 


STOP 


— 






“ 






— 



Description: 

This macro command serves the same function as END, but in contrast 
to END it can be placed anywhere in the macro. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 199 



08/25/99 





Audio Tools 



SPLITKEY 

Splits the macro flow depending on the midikey 
Type: Structure 





Key Nr. 


SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step 1 


$02 SPLITKEY 


key 


macro 


step 



Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the current key is higher or the same as the 
key specified in the parameter. 

Parameters: 



key 

macro 

step 



This parameter specifies a key number to compare against. If the 
key you play is higher or the same as this key, the macro will 
branch, otherwise it resumes. 

The ID of the macro to branch to 

The step number inside the macro to branch to 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 200 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SPLITVEL 

Splits the macro flow depending on the velocity 
Type: Structure 



■ 1 1 mmm . 


. Velocity SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step r 


$03 SPLITVEL 


velocity macro 


step 



Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the current velocity is higher or the same as 
the velocity parameter. 



Parameters: 

velocity 

macro 

step 



Specifies the velocity to compare the current velocity against. 
If the current velocity is higher or the same, the macro will 
branch, otherwise it will resume. 

The ID of the macro to branch to 

The step number inside the macro to branch to 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 201 



08/25/99 




AAlfSyX Audio Tools 



LOOP 

Loops back to a macrostep 
Type: Structure 




Description: 

Loops to the specified location within the current macro n-times. 

Parameters: 

step = The step number inside the current macro to loop back to 

times = Number of times to loop back (0=infinite) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 202 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



GOTO 

Jumps to another macro 
Type: Structure 




Description: 

Performs an unconditional jump to the specified location. 

Parameters: 

macro = The ID of the macro to jump into 

step = The step number inside the target macro to jump to 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 203 



08/25/99 




M$j$y3l Audio Tools 



WAIT 

Suspends macro execution for some time 
Type: Structure 



Keyoff 


Random Time 


Milliseconds ! 


$07 


WAIT 


key 

release 


random 








Ms 



Description: 

The execution of the current macro will be suspended until the specified 
time has elapsed or a keyoff occurs. 

Parameters: 



key release 



random 



ms 



If this flag is set to ON, the macro will resume when it receives 
a keyoff regardless of the specified wait time 

If this flag is set, the macro will resume after a random time has 
elapsed. In this case the ticks/millisec. parameter defines the 
maximum wait time 

Specifies, in milliseconds, the time to delay macro execution 
A value of 65535 will cause the wait to be endless 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 204 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PLAYMACRO 

Start a macro on another voice 
Type: Structure 







Voice Nr. 


SoundMacro ID 


Don’t reset i 


$08 


PLAYMACRO 


Voice 


macro 


Rst.flag 









Description: 

Starts another macro on the specified voice. Can be used to start 2 or 
more macros at the same time from a single note. 



Parameters: 

Voice Nr. 



Macro ID 
Don’t reset 



Identifies the voice to be associated with the macro to be started. 
(0=Voice1 ,..., 3=Voice4) 

The ID of the macro to start 

If this flag is set to ON the voice specified will not be reset 
This is useful to take over the voice as it is at this point. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 205 



08/25/99 






wSfM Audio Tools 

KEYOFF 

Sends keyoff to voice 
Type: Control 



j Voice Nr. | 


$12 


KEYOFF 


Voice 















Description: 

Sends a keyoff to the specified voice. Specify 255 to send a keyoff to the 
current voice. 

Parameters: 

Voice = Specifies the voice to send a keyoff to (0-3). Enter 255 to send a 

keyoff to this voice. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 206 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SPLITRND 

Splits the macro flow depending on a random number 
Type: Structure 





RND 


SoundMacro ID 


SoundMacro step | 


$13 SPLITRND 


rnd 


macro 


step 



Description: 

This command is used to conditionally change the flow of execution in 
the current macro. The macro program will jump to the given macrostep 
inside the specified macro, if the generated random value is higher or the 
same as the rnd parameter. 

Parameters: 

rnd = Value to compare the random number against. 

macro = The ID of the macro to branch to 

step = The step number inside the specified macro to branch to 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 207 



08/25/99 





Audio Tools 

TRAP_KEYOFF 

Sets a trap on reception of a keyoff 
Type: Structure 



SoundMacro ID SoundMacro step 



$28 TRAP_KEYOFF macrolD step 

Description: 

This command sets a so-called trap for a keyoff. This means that as 
soon as the macro receives a keyoff by either the MIDI sequencer or the 
KEYOFF command, the macro will jump to the macrostep where the trap 
was set. As long as no keyoff is received the macro proceeds its 
execution in normal fashion. 

This command is used to escape an infinite loop or wait. 

Parameters: 

macro = ID of the macro to jump to as soon as a keyoff is received 

step = Step number in the macro to jump into as soon as a keyoff is 

received 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 208 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



UNTRAP_KEYOFF 

Removes a trap set for keyoff 
Type: Structure 




Description: 

Remove a previously set TRAP_KEYOFF. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 209 



08/25/99 





MusyK Audio Tools 



Voice/Sample Macros 

PLAYKEYSAMPLE 

Starts a sample on key index 
Type: Voice/Sample 



$09 


PLAYKEYSAMPLE 


— 















Description: 

Starts a sample on voice 3, using the midikey as an index, into an index 
table called “sample-map”. This index table must be defined with one 
single macro using the SAMPLEMAP command. This “sample-map” 
macro must be placed in the Songgroup on the first Drumlist entry. There 
can be only one index table per project. 

See also SAMPLEMAP. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 210 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SETVOICE 

Selects a voice for this macro 
Type: Voice/Sample 




Description: 

Selects a new voice channel for the current macro. This command 
overrides any selections by the MIDI channel. 



This command *must* be the first one in the macro. 



Parameters: 

Voice = Specifies the voice number to use (0-3). A value of 255 keeps 

the voice chosen by the MIDI sequence 

Rst.Flag = If this flag is set to ON the voice selected will not be reset. This is 

useful to take control over the voice in its present state. 

Toggle Flag = If this flag is set to ON and the voice selected by the MIDI 

sequencer is voice 1 or 2, the voice really used to play the sound 
will toggle between voice 1 and 2 on every key played. 

This is very effective to create echos. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 211 



08/25/99 






Ml my./. Audio Tools 



STARTSAMPLE 

Plays a sample 
Type: Voice! Sample 



Sample-ID 



$1 0 STARTSAMPLE Sample ID 

Description: 

Plays back the specified sample. 

Parameters: 

Sample ID = The ID of the sample to play back. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 212 








Game Boy Musicians Reference 



VOICE_OFF 

Stops sound 
Type: Voice/Sample 




Description: 

Stops the sound on the current voice. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 213 



08/25/99 




I MyX. Audio Tools 

VOICE_ON 

Starts sound 
Type: Voice/Sample 



Duty cycle 


$14 


VOICE_ON 


Duty Cycle 













Description: 

This command starts the sound after all initial setups (if the initialization 
phase was not overridden by a SET_VOICE command). The DutyCycle 
parameter is used for the rectangular wave oscillator (voice 1/2), with 
values from 0-3 representing 12.5, 25, 50 and 75 percent pulse-width. A 
duty-cycle of 255 can be used to have the velocity influence the pulse- 
width. 

For voice 3 use the WAVE_ON command. 

For voice 4 the parameter is unimportant. 

Parameters: 

DutyCycle = Specify the duty cycle to use (see above). Enter 255 to have the 
velocity modify the duty cycle (0-31=12.5%, 32-63=25%, 
64-95=50%, 96-127=75%) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 214 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SETNOISE 

Sets parameters for the noise generator 
Type: Voice/Sample 





Poly.clock 


Poly.Step 


Freq. ratio 


$15 SETNOISE 


Clock 


Step 


Freq. 



Description: 

Sets up the polynomial clock counter for the white noise generator (voice 
4). 



Parameters: 



Clock 

Step 

Freq. 



Values from 0-13 select the ratio of frequencies 
If 0 selects 15 steps for the counter, 1 selects 7 steps 
Values from 0-7 select the frequency ratio 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 215 



08/25/99 





Mmyii Audi0 

Tools 



PWM_START 

Starts the Pulse-Width-Modulation effect on voice 3 
Type: Voice/Sample 







Low limit 


High limit 


Speed | 


$1F PWIVLSTART 


LimitLo 


LimitHi 


ms 









Description: 

Starts a software generated pulse-width effect on voice 3. The width of 
the pulse will change over time (in a ping-pong-like fashion) between the 
specified low and high limits. 



Parameters: 

LimitLo 

LimitHi 

ms 



Low limit of the pulse width (0-15) 

High limit of the pulse width (0-1 5) 

Time in milliseconds it takes to complete one puise cycle 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 216 








Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PWM_UPDATE 

Updates the Pulse-Width-Modulation effect on voice 3 
Type: Voice/ Sample 



Low limit High limit Speed 



$20 PWM_UPDATE LimitLo LimitHi ms 

Description: 

This is basically the same as the PWM_START command. It modifies the 
pulse width limits and the pulse cycle time, without restarting the effect. 

Parameters: 

LimitLo = Low limit of the pulse width (0-15) 

LimitHi = High limit of the pulse width (0-15) 

ms = Time in milliseconds it takes to complete one pulse cycle 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 217 



08/25/99 





Audjo Tools 

PWM_FIXED 

Starts a generated pulse wave of fixed width 
Type: Voice/Sample 



Duty i 


$21 


PWM_FIXED 


Duty 















Description: 

Starts a fixed generated rectangular pulse wave on voice 3. The duty 
parameter specifies the pulse-width from 0-15, which is equivalent to a 
0-50% duty cycle. 

Parameters: 

Duty = Width of the rectangular pulse (0-15) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 218 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PWM_VELOCITY 

Starts a generated pulse wave of velocity-dependent width 
Type: Voice/Sample 



$22 


>- 

h- 

o 

o 

_J 

UJ 

> 

i 

s 

§ 

Q- 




m 













Description: 

Starts a fixed generated puise wave on voice 3. The pulse-width is set 
according to the current key velocity. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 219 



08/25/99 





ItfSpI Audio Tools 

WAVE_ON 

Loads a looping wave into voice 3 and starts it 
Type: Voice/Sample 



| 1 Block SMPID 


$26 


WAVE.ON 


Sample ID 













Description: 

This command loads a short, 32 sample long looping waveform into the 
WaveRAM and starts voice 3 after all initial setups (if the initialization 
phase was not overridden by a SET_VOICE command). 

Parameters: 

SamplelD = ID of the sample to load into Wave RAM. If the ID is 0 no new 

sample will be loaded and the contents of the Wave RAM remain 
unchanged. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 220 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Volume/Pan Macros 

SETADSR 

Uses a software ADSR envelope on the current voice 
Type: Volume/Panning 



Table-ID (ADSR) 


$0C SETADSR 


Table 













Description: 

The data from the specified ADSR table will be used to perform an 
ADSR envelope on the current voice. 

Parameters: 

Table = The ID of the ADSR table to use 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 221 



08/25/99 





Mu$yK Audio Tools 



SETVOLUME 

Sets an absolute volume 
Type: Volume/Panning 



| Volume j 


$0D SETVOLUME 


Volume 















Description: 

Sets a fixed volume on the current channel. 

Parameters: 

volume = Specifies an absolute volume for the current channel (0-1 27). 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 222 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PANNING 

Sets the panning to be used with the macro 
Type: Volume/Panning 



| Pan position j 


$0E PANNING 


pan.pos 















Description: 

Sets the position for the current voice channel. Game Boy hardware only 
allows for absolute left, absolute right and center positions. 

Parameters: 

pan.pos = 0-41 designates left output, 42-83 center and 84-127 right 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 223 



08/25/99 




iv% USyK A uc |i 0 Tools 



ENVELOPE 

Starts a software envelope 
Type: Volume/Panning 







Envelope/Fade-in 


Milliseconds | 


$0F 


ENVELOPE 


Flag 






ms 



Description: 

Starts a software envelope. The volume will be faded out/in to mute level 
or full volume in the time specified. Due to Game Boy hardware 
restrictions, this may be of lower quality than the hardware envelope. 

Parameters: 

Flag = If OFF, fades out to mute level, if ON fades in to maximum level 

ms = Time to fade out to zero in milliseconds 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 224 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



HARDENVELOPE 

Starts hardware envelope 



Type: Volume/Panning 




Description: 

Starts a hardware envelope. The volume will be faded out/in in the 
specified time, which cannot be longer than 1640ms and is dependent on 
the current volume. By employing the hardware feature for the envelope, 
the sound might be slightly less distorted in comparison with the software 
envelope. The software envelope, however, can span longer fading 
times and also works on voice 3. 

Parameters: 

Flag = If OFF, fades the voice down to mute level. If ON, fades the 

voice in from the current volume to maximum. 

ms = Time in milliseconds (highly approximate!) for the fade to 

complete. Due to hardware restrictions this value cannot be 
larger than 1 640 ms for a fade from maximum volume. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 225 



08/25/99 




JWlliyX Audio Tools 



Pitch Macros 

RESET_MOD 

Reset all pitch modulations 
Type: Pitch 



$04 


RESET_MOD 










— 







Description: 

This command will stop and reset any active pitch modulation on the 
current voice channel. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 226 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



STOP_MOD 

Stops any pitch modulation 
Type: Pitch 



$0A 


STOP_MOD 






— 








— 



Description: 

Stops any pitch modulation on the current voice channel, but does not 
reset the current values. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 227 



08/25/99 




MVMfK Audio Tools 

PORTLAST 

Portamento from the last note 
Type: Pitch 







Transpose 


Detune 


Milliseconds J 


$16 


PORTLAST 


Keys 


Cents 








Ms 



Description: 

The pitch will slide from the last known value to the pitch of the current 
key, plus the keys and cents parameters, in the specified time. 

Parameters: 



Keys 



Transposes the current key by this value (-127 ~ 127) 



Cents 



ms 



Transposes the current key by a fraction of one key (-99 ~ 99) 
Can be used together with the whole key transposed 

A time in milliseconds for the portamento to be finished 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 228 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



RNDNOTE 

Creates a random pitch 
Type: Pitch 





Note Lo 


Detune 


Note Hi 


Fixed/Free 


Abs/Rel 3 


$17 RNDNOTE 


note-lo 


detune 


note-hi 


fixlfree 


Rel/abs 



Description: 

Sets random pitch. Note lo is the lower end of the range, note hi the 
upper end. The detune value will be added after the random pitch is 
calculated and is specified in positive cents. If the free flag is set, the 
pitch will be generated freely inside the range. Otherwise, a random key 
from this range will be generated. If the abs flag is set, the specified 
range is absolute. Otherwise it is relative to the current key. 



Parameters: 




note-lo = 


Specifies the low key for the random range 


detune = 


Specifies a fraction of a key (0-99) to be added to the random 
result in the end 


note-hi = 


Specifies the top key for the random range 


fix/free = 


If OFF, a random key will be generated inside the specified 
range. If ON a random pitch inside the permissable range is 
generated without respect to any keys. 


rel/abs = 


If OFF, the range is relative to the current key. If ON the range is 
fixed by the specified keys 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 229 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



ADDNOTE 

Modifies the current key by offset values 
Type: Pitch 





Add 


Detune 


Org Key J 


$18 ADDNOTE 


add 


detune 


org.key | 



Description: 

Transposes the current key by a number of keys and a cent fraction. 

The result is temporary when the org.key flag is set, so that further 
ADDNOTE commands will again take the MIDI key as base. If the flag is 
OFF, the result of this command will be considered to be the new base. 

Parameters: 



add 

detune 

org.key 



Value (-127 - 127) to transpose the current key by 

Key fraction (-99 - 99) to transpose the current key by 

If set to OFF the result will form a new base key. If set to ON the 
result is temporary until the next ADDNOTE command. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 230 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SETNOTE 

Sets pitch to a fixed note 
Type: Pitch 



Kev Detune 




Description: 

Sets the pitch to a fixed note and detune in cents. 

Parameters: 

key = The key number to set the pitch to (0-127) 

detune = The fraction of a key (-99 - 99) to add to the pitch 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 231 



03/25/99 






musyK Audio Tools 



LASTNOTE 

Retrieves the last note of the current voice 
Type: Pitch 




Description: 

Recalculates the current key by transposing the last key played on this 
voice. 



Parameters: 

add = Number of keys to transpose the last key by (-127 - 127) 

detune = The fraction of a key to transpose the last key by (-99 - 99) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 232 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PORTAMENTO 

Starts a portamento 




$1 B PORT AMENT. 



Range Note Range Detune Abs/Rel 



Milliseconds 



Description: 

Slides the pitch from the current pitch to a target pitch specified in the 
given time. 



Parameters: 



Keys 




Transpose value for the current key to yield the target key of the 
portamento (-127 ~ 127) 


Cents 


= 


Transpose value in fractions of a key to yield the target key of 
the portamento (-99 ~ 99) 


Flag 


— 


If OFF, the key and cents specified form the target of the 
portamento. If ON, the key and cents are added to the current 
key (relative mode) to yield the target of the portamento. 


ms 


= 


A time in milliseconds for the portamento to be finished 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 233 



08/25/99 





msyM. Audio Tools 

VIBRATO 

Starts a vibrato effect 
Type: Pitch 



i ci 


Level note 


Level fine 


Milliseconds J 


$1C VIBRATO 


Keys 


Cents 


ms 



Description: 

Adds a vibrato effect to the current voice. The intensity of the vibrato is 
specified by a displacement of the current key by a number of keys and 
cents. When the keys parameter is negative, the effect will start to 
decrease in frequency. Otherwise, the frequency will first increase. 

Parameters: 



Keys 

Cents 

ms 



Intensity of the vibrato in keys relative to the current key 

Intesity of the vibrato in fractions of a key relative to the current 
key. This value is added to the Keys parameter. 

Time in milliseconds for a full frequency cycle to complete. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 234 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



PITCHSWEEP 

Adds a sweep effect to the pitch 
Type: Pitch 



I Note Limit Cent Limit 


Sweep 0/1 


Milliseconds 1 


$1D PITCHSWEEP Limit Limit fine 


Select 


Ms 



Description: 

Adds a sliding effect to the current pitch. After reaching the iimit, the pitch 
wraps back and the slide starts again. There are 2 independent 
modulators that can be selected by the select parameter. If the Limit is 
negative the sweep goes downwards, otherwise upwards. 

Parameters: 



Limit = Specifies the number of keys to slide up or down relative to the 

current key. 

Limit fine = Specifies the fraction of a key in addition to the full keys to slide 

up or down to. 



Select 



ms 



If 0 selects sweep effect 1 , if 1 selects sweep effect 2. Two 
independent sweep effects which may work against each other 
can be started. 

Time for one sweep cycle to complete in milliseconds 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 235 



08/25/99 





pAu$yX Audio Tools 



Special Macros 

SENDFLAG 

Raises a flag the application can evaluate 
Type: Special 



Flag Bit 



$23 SENDFLAG Num 



Description: 

Raises one of 8 user flags the game application can evaluate. 

This feature is mainly used to signal certain events to the game program. 

A raised flag remains raised until the application has read its status, at 
which point the flag will be cleared again. 

Parameters: 

num = Number of the flag to raise (0-7) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 236 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



SAMPLEMAP 

Builds the sample map macro 
Type: Voice/Sample 



SMP ID 


$24 SAMPLEMAP Sample ID 











Description: 

This command can be used multiple times inside a single macro, for the 
entire project to define the order of the samples that can be used with the 
PLAYKEYSAMPLE command. Each such macrostep references a 
sample that will be assigned to the keynumber that is equivalent to the 
macro step number. 

Parameters: 

Sample ID = ID of the sample to assign to the midikey equivalent to the macro 
step number 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 237 



08/25/99 




Mvsy'K Audio Tools 



CURRENTVOL 

Fakes the internal volume 
Type: Special 



i Volume 


$25 CURRENTVOL 


Volume 













Description: 

This command is used to change the internal volume in the sound 
system, only. The real voice volume remains unaffected. This is 
necessary after the HARDENVELOPE command has been used which, 
due to hardware limitations, leaves the sound system uninformed about 
the real hardware volume. 

Use this command in conjunction with carefully timed macros, to tell the 
soundsystem your idea of the current hardware volume (usually after a 
full fade-in or fade-out). 



Parameters: 

volume = MIDI volume (0-127) to set as a fake value in the sound system 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 238 







Game Boy Musicians Reference 



ADD_SET_PRIO 

Changes the priority of a sound effect 



Type: Special 




Description: 

Modifies the current priority of a sound effect. Depending on the state of 
Flag, the Value is either set directly or added to the current priority. 



Parameters: 

Flag = If OFF, adds the Value parameter to the current priority. If ON, 

sets the Value parameter immediately as the new priority. 

Value = Ranges from -128 to 127. If the Flag parameter is OFF, it will be 

added to the current priority. If the Flag parameter is ON, this 
value will be set as an absolute priority (using the 2's 
complement of the value. So -1 becomes 255 and -128 
becomes 128). 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 239 



08/25/99 





08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 240 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Appendix 2.4 - Peiformance Issues 

Because of the age and nature of the Game Boy architechture, some 
macro commands require more CPU performance than others. 

This means that the musician has, to some extent, direct influence on the 
overall performance of the game application. 

If the game logic is simple enough, as for instance in a puzzle game like 
Tetris, performance might not be much of an issue. More complex 
games, like action shooters on the other hand, could suffer if the music is 
using a lot of special features. This would require more performance to 
be spent on the music. 

The table on the following page puts all commands in categories, from 1 
through 5, with 1 being the category that requires the most performance. 

All commands that do something just once might sometimes require 
more time than other commands, just because what they are doing is 
more complex. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 241 



08/25/99 



■ - 1 udio Tools 



Category 


Command(s) 


1 


PORTAMENTO 


PORTLAST 


2 


VIBRATO 


PITCHSWEEP 


PWM_START, PWM_UPDATE 


PWM_FIXED, PWM VELOCITY 


PLAYKEYSAMPLE, START_SAMPLE 


SETADSR 


ENVELOPE 


3 


RNDNOTE 


PLAYMACRO 


SPLITRND 


VOICE_ON 


WAVE_ON 


4 


VOICE_OFF 


ADDNOTE, SETNOTE, LASTNOTE 


SETVOLUME 


SPLITKEY, SPLITVELOCITY 


WAIT 


LOOP 


KEYOFF 


SETVOICE 


5 


RESETMOD 


STOPMOD 


PANNING 


SETNOISE 


GOTO 


HARDENVELOPE 


SENDFLAG 


ADDSETPRIO 


TRAPKEYOFF, UNTRAPKEYOFF 


CURRENTVOL 


ENDMACRO, STOP 


SAMPLEMAP 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 242 








Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Appendix 2.5 - Troubleshooting Guide 

This section is intended to provide answers to potential problems you 
might encounter. 



I start the slave program but it fails to connect to 
Game Boy 

There are a number of possibilities. Please read through every one of 

them to find out which one applies to your situation. 

• Is the link cable securely connected to your PC's parallel port on the 
one end and securely to the Game Boy Color on the other end? 

• Is Game Boy Color switched on? 

• Does the Game Boy Color have a fresh set of batteries, if you are not 
using an AC adapter? 

• Try using a fresh set of batteries instead of an AC adapter. Some 
adapters may cause too much interference for the serial link. 

• Is the slave cartridge properly inserted into the Game Pak slot? When 
you turn on the Game Boy, you should see a screen similar to this. 







EG om e Boy Co 1 


r Slave! 




IEMMZ80 : 16® 


KByte OKI 


■Serial daenon . . . DK 1 


I mer daenon 




jflusyX in it . . 




Ha iting tor 


host 


Uo Tune 


Macro 


Si: 




S2: 




S3: :::::: 




S4: 





• Did you use an MBC-5 Flash ROM when you flashed the slave 
program for Game Boy Color? 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 243 



08/25/99 









Audio Tools 



Windows 95I9B: 

• Have you specified to correct parallel port in the configuration 
program of the slave? 

Windows NT 4.0 

• Have you installed the device driver? 

• Have you specified the correct parallel port address in the registry? 

• Have you disabled the parport device driver? 



• If you are using an on-board parallel port of your PC’s mainboard, is it 
set from the BIOS to be a standard parallel port (no ECP/EPP mode 
with DMA)? 

• If you are using an on-board parallel port of your PC’s mainboard, is it 
accidentally disabled from the BIOS? 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 244 




Game Boy Musicians Reference 



I get the Game Boy to recognize a connection but it 
seems to get stuck immediately 

Once the Game Boy Color acknowledges a connection to the slave 
program, the display of the Game Boy will look like this. 




If you do not get out of the negotiating phase, check for the following. 

• Does the Game Boy Color have a fresh set of batteries, if you are not 
using an AC adapter? 

• Try using a fresh set of batteries instead of an AC adapter. Some 
adapters may cause too much interference for the serial link. 

• Did you use an MBC5 Flash ROM when you flashed the slave 
program for Game Boy Color? 

• If you are using an on-board parallel port of your PCs mainboard, is it 
set from the BIOS to be a standard parallel port (no ECP/EPP mode 
with DMA)? 

Once you are out of the negotiation phase the Game Boy screen should 

look like this. 




©1999 Factors LLC 



Appendix 2: 245 



08/25/99 









Audio Tools 



If you are getting errors in the slave program Link status window like this, 



Connecting to Gone Boy OK? (1181 bytes/sec) 

Querying ROM sample list... FAILED* 




OR 



Connecting to Game Boy... OK* (1181 bytes/sec) 
Querying ROM sample list... OK* (0 ROM Samples found) 
Determining SRAM size... FAILED* 




check the following. 

• Does the Game Boy Color have a fresh set of batteries, if you are not 
using an AC adapter? 

• Try using a fresh set of batteries instead of an AC adapter. Some 
adapters may cause too much interference for the serial link. 

• Did you use an MBC5 Flash ROM when you flashed the slave 
program for Game Boy Color? 

• If you are using an on-board parallel port of your PCs mainboard, is it 
set from the BIOS to be a standard parallel port (no ECP/EPP mode 
with DMA)? 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 246 









Game Boy Musicians Reference 



I send a project to the slave but it does not download 
any data 

This is most likely caused by an error in your project. 

All references in all sound macros, for instance, need to be resolved 

before a project that is suitable for the Game Boy can be created and 

downloaded by the slave program. 

Typical project errors are: 

• Another macro referenced in a sound macro that does not yet exist, 
or no longer exists. The editor will have assigned the reserved ID 0 
(zero) for it. 

• An ADSR curve referenced in a sound macro that does not yet exist, 
or no longer exists. The editor will have assigned the reserved ID 0 
(zero) for it. 

• A sample referenced from a sound macro that does not exist. Here 
the reserved ID 0 (zero) will also have been assigned. 

• SETVOICE command inside a macro is not step 0. 

• A soundeffect macro contains no SETVOICE instruction. 

• More than 256 macros used. 

• More than 256 ADSR curves used. 

• More than 256 samples used. 

• Out of project memory. 

• Out of sample memory. 

® More than one (1) keymap macro in the project. 

• A loop command in a macro that does not loop back above the 
command itself. 



I made changes to my project but the slave tells me 
there are none 

This is caused by accuracy problems in the Game Boy target format. 

Sometimes Game Boy can not exactly represent values you specify. For 
instance, a wait time can be specified in milliseconds, but the millisecond 
resolution on Game Boy is a raster of 16.67ms. Hence the values 5, 10 
and 16 would all be treated like 16.67ms by the Game Boy hardware and 
effectively cause no change in the project data. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 247 



08/25/99 




M JSyX Audio Tools 



While I'm working the sound slave disconnects itself 

The slave program verifies the connection to the Game Boy hardware 
every second. During this phase, it also determines if the highest 
possible transfer rate can still be obtained. 

If the slave program detects that the link to Game Boy has been severed 
or too many data transmission errors occur, which can not be corrected, 
it will terminate the connection and close itself. In these cases this popup 
window will be displayed. 



| MusyX Soundtool 




MB 

■ill 


:|||-. v: : ■- : : : 'i 


;■ w : •«t 







The most common causes for too many transmission errors are: 

• The Game Boy is running on batteries rather than an AC adapter and 
the batteries are too weak to supply the power for the serial port. 

• The link cable is intertwined with other cables or is routed alongside a 
monitor or other electrical devices, which causes interference in the 
link cable. 

• A 'noisy' AC-adapter is used to supply power to the Game Boy. Use 
only a stabilized adapter that does not introduce any artifacts like 
humming sound or noise in the Game Boy (can usually be quickly 
verified by connecting a headset to the Game Boy and listening 
closely for any disturbances). 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 248 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



i send MIDI data but I do not hear anything 

First, you need to make sure that the project data was ail valid. If you 
send the project to the slave program but nothing is downloaded to 
Game Boy, please refer to the previous section in this trouble-shooting 
guide titled, " I send a project to the slave but it does not download any 
data 

Step #1 : 

Assuming that your project has been downloaded to Game Boy, we must 
first verify that the slave program receives MIDI data. To do this, keep an 
eye on the 'MIDI data' window in the slave program, while pressing a key 
on your MIDI keyboard. Is the received MIDI data printed out in the 
slave's MIDI data window? 

If yes, please skip right to step #2. 

Otherwise: 

• Verify that your MIDI cabling between your keyboard (or whatever 
MIDI device you are sending the MIDI data from) and the PC running 
the slave program is correct. 

• Verify that the slave program is using the correct MIDI device for its 
data. A list of all accessible devices appears in the main log when 
you start the slave. Right after this list, it tells you which device 
number corresponding to the list was opened. If this is the wrong 
device, please reconfigure the slave using the configuration program. 

• If you are using a single machine setup with multiple MIDI input and 
output devices and you are sending MIDI data from your PC to an 
output device (which you have also opened for input in the slave), 
verify that a hardware loopback device is installed to send the MIDI 
data back into the PC. This can be circumvented by using a MIDI 
loopback device (software based) like "MIDI Yoke" or "HuBi" or a two 
machine setup with a dedicated MIDI input device. 

• Verify that the hardware port used for MIDI data input is operational. 
The best way to do so is to monitor the MIDI input signal indicators on 
your sequencer program (like CuBase). 

When you have found the problem please fix it and try again. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 249 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



Step #2: 

Now that the slave program is receiving MIDI data, does the Game Boy 

itself receive it? 

Examine the line "Receiving MIDI" on the Game Boy screen. Does a 

rotating indicator appear while you are sending MIDI data? 

If yes skip ahead to Step #3. 

Otherwise: 

• Are you currently downloading anything into Game Boy? While a 
project is being downloaded to Game Boy all incoming MIDI data is 
discarded. This is normal. 

• Are you sending data on a MIDI channel >4? Only the first four MIDI 
channels can be used. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 250 





Game Boy Musicians Reference 



Step #3: 

The reception of MIDI data by Game Boy suggests that there is a fault in 

either the MIDI setup or the sound macro itself. 

• Verify that the correct MIDI program for the MIDI channel being used 
is set in the MIDI setup for your sound group in the MusyK editor. 

• Verify that the correct sound macro has been assigned to the 
program number that you have assigned to the MIDI channel on 
which you send data. Refer to the screen shot below. 




(follow the path of the arrows above, in determining these settings) 



• Verify that the macro contains either a VOICE_ON (for voices 1 , 2 
and 4) or WAVE_ON, STARTSAMPLE, PLAYKEYSAMPLE, 
PWM_START, PWM_FIXED or PWM_VELOCITY (for voice 3) 
instruction. 

• Verify that the macro does not contain a SETVOLUME 0 instruction. 

• Verify that the velocity of the key you are sending is not 0. 

In addition, you need to make sure that you did not assign a macro, 
created for instance for voice 3, to another voice. Although this will not 
be harmful to the system, mixing macros and their implicitly associated 
voices will rarely produce desirable results. The only occasion where this 
does not make a difference is the usage on either voice 1 and 2, since 
these are of identical design. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 2: 251 



08/25/9S 



MuzyA Audio Tools 



You may always override any implicit voice selection (made by MIDI 
channels 1-4 which map to voices 1-4) with the macro instruction 
SETVOICE. This must appear as the very first instruction inside a macro. 

In doing so, you can reroute any macro to any voice you want. This 
requires careful design of your sound sequence. Using the SETVOICE 
command in a song macro is usually discouraged, unless used to select 
the Voicel/2 toggle option. 

The SETVOICE command, however, is required for every sound effect 
macro, since they have no default voice assignment. 



When I play a sample I hear a humming sound 

The Game Boy hardware was originally not intended to play back music 
or sound which contains more than 32 samples. To reproduce samples 
which are longer, Game Boy needs to be fed the samples in parts 
containing 32 samples each. While feeding it these parts, sound output 
needs to be stopped temporarily (due to hardware restrictions) and then 
restarted. This stopping/restarting causes an audible distortion. 

Depending on the quality of the sample (either 1920Hz or 8192Hz), this 
distortion changes frequency as well, due to the fact that the voice needs 
to be fed those 32 sample chunks at a different rate. 

At a sample rate of 1920Hz, the distortion has a frequency of 60Hz and 
256Hz at a sample rate of 8192Hz. 

Also, this distortion is always of a fixed volume, regardless of the volume 
setting of voice 3. Therefore, it becomes much more audible when the 
sample is not played back at full volume. We recommend playing back 
samples at the highest possible volume to minimize notable distortions. 



This problem does not arise when you use looping music or sound of 
only 32 samples in length, since no further reloads are necessary. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 2: 252 






Game Boy Musicians Reference 



There seem to be timing problems with regard to the 
start and length of notes 

The shortest note Game Boy can handle is 1/1 6 th . This is due to internal 
timing resolutions of the Game Boy hardware vs. acceptable CPU 
performance. Because of this, the length of a note should always be a 
multiple of 1/1 6 th . 

We suggest that you quantize your arrangement to 1/1 6 th to minimize 
any timing artifacts. 

You may still experience timing problems with a 1/1 6 th note limit when 
you play your song from your MIDI sequencer. These problems will 
vanish once the song is integrated in the game application and played 
back solely by Game Boy. 

The reason for this lies in the fact that the PC and Game Boy, in the 
master/slave setup, are not synchronized while creating a song. 
Whenever a note is to be played back *during* this Game Boy internal 
1/1 6 th raster, the note will be delayed in its keyon until the next 
scheduled point in this raster. 

To slightly compensate for this, a keyoff is sent to a note immediately. 
This does not necessarily cause anything to happen right away. But 
should the keyoff be received while servicing the voice or before, while 
already being in the raster, the voice will react to the keyoff. If the time 
frame for the corresponding voice has elapsed, the keyoff will be delayed 
until the next scheduled time within the raster. 

Once implemented in the application this no longer applies, since the 
Game Boy synthesizer is of course in sync with its own sequencer. 



Further timing problems while working on the song which are beyond any 
control are: 

• Windows MIDI device delays. 

• Windows preempting a task. 

• Network delays in multiple machine setups. 

• Recurring communication errors with Game Boy. 



©1999 Factors LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 2: 253 




08 / 25/99 



Appendix 2: 254 





N64 Programmers Reference 



APPENDIX 3 - N64 Programmers Reference 



Table of Contents: 

MusyK Basic Architecture 257 

Musy¥x and MORT Voice Compression 260 

Performance Impact on the Game Application.... 261 

Requirements for Services Provided to MusyX. 264 

Reverb Effect Engine - REE 266 

Volume Control.... 266 

IDs 267 

3D API...... 267 

Function Section: SOUND 269 

SNDJNIT 269 

SND_QUIT 271 

SND_SHUTDOWN 272 

SND_GET_PLAYBACKINFO 273 

SND_RE!NIT 274 

SND_ VOLUME 276 

SND_ MASTER. VOLUME 277 

SND_MONO 278 

SND_PLAY 279 

SND_STOP 282 

SND_ PAUSE 283 

SND_SILENCE 284 

SNDJSJDLE 285 

SND_CROSSFADE 286 

SND_CROSSFADE_DONE 289 

SND_CONTINUE 290 

SND_MUTE 291 

SND_SPEED 292 

SND_SEQLOOP 293 

SND_GET_SEQLOOPCNT 294 

SND_GET_SEQVALID ..295 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 255 



MusyX Audio Tools 



Function Section: SOUND (Continued) 

SND.SEQ. VOLUME 296 

SND_GET_SEQVOLGROUP 297 

SND_ASSIGN_VGROUP2TRACK 298 

SND_FXSTART 299 

SND_FXKEYOFF 300 

SND_FXCHECK 301 

SND_FXPANNING ..302 

SND_FXSURROUNDPANNING 303 

SND_FXVOLUME 304 

SND_FXPITCHBEND 305 

SND_FXMODULATION 306 

SND_FXPEDAL 307 

SND_FXDOPPLER 308 

SND_FXREVERB .....309 

SND_PUSHGROUP 310 

SND.POPGROUP 311 

SND_READFLAG 312 

SND.WRITEFLAG 313 

SND_ALLOC_STREAM 314 

SND_STREAM_ALLOCLENGTH 316 

SND_STREAM_MIXPARAMETER 31 7 

SND__FREE_STREAM 31 8 

S N D_ ACTI VATE_ REVERB 319 

SND_DEACTIVATE_REVERB 321 

SND_ADD_LISTENER 322 

SND_UPDATE_LISTENER 324 

SND_REMOVE_LISTENER 325 

SND_ADD_EMITTEREX 326 

SND_ADD_EMITTER 329 

SND_UPDATE_EMITTER 330 

SND_REMOVE_EMITTER 331 

SND_CHECK_EMITTER 332 

SND_EMITTER_FXID 333 

Function Section: VoiceLib MORT Interface 334 

VOICEJNIT 334 

VOICE_EXIT ...335 

VOICE_SET_DI RECTORY 336 

VOICE_START 337 

VOICE_STOP 339 

VOICE_CHECKACTIVE 340 

VOICE. PARAMETERS 341 

VOICE_GET_TIME 342 

VOICE_SYNC_IDLE 343 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 256 





N64 Programmers Reference 



Musy& Basic Architecture 

Every sound system has one central element, the instrument or sound 
effect, depending on whether you are speaking about music or effects. 
Sometimes they are handled separately from each other, sometimes the 
only difference is the way they are started. MusyX. follows the latter 
approach. According to the unified way these two entities are handled, 
we will use just one name, Sound. 

A sound is the central element in MusyK. Although the name suggests 
that the sound really is nothing more than a sample and a few 
parameters, things are quite different within MmyiL 

In MusyX a sound actually represents a little program that is executed in 
a tokenized form at run time. This allows the music / sound designer 
more control over the produced sound. 

From a programmer’s point of view, these details are quite well hidden. 
The only time a programmer gets in contact with the macro program is 
when data is exchanged between the sound and application program. 

As mentioned before, there are two basic types of any kind of sound 
reproduction within Musyfc. Instruments are used in the context of a 
piece of music, called a song. Each song has its very own ID, to identify 
which song is to be started once the application decides to do so. 

Songs always use a MIDI-like, but much more powerful, proprietary 
representation. Sequenced music reproduction was chosen over 
streamed audio, since it offers much more flexibility. 

Streamed audio is supported, but the application programmer will have 
to take care of the actual streaming process. Af<ft>Xjust offers buffers 
for streaming data. 

Sound effects are directly accessed using an automatically generated, 
unique sound effect ID. The sound designer has the possibility of 
accessing multiple sounds using just one ID, but this detail is totally 
hidden from the programmer. 

Both sound effects and songs are grouped together to form units called 
Groups. Groups are the basic data element that the programmer has to 
deal with. Groups are used to build small units of data that can be more 
easily managed than the whole project. On CD based systems or other 
systems that cannot access their mass storage device in real time, 
saving ROM space is always an issue. This way of structuring the data is 
meant to help with that. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 257 




Audio Tools 



For example, the musician and the programmer could agree on setting 
up a group containing all basic sound effects, and yet another one that 
contains all basic jingles needed during normal game play. 

These groups probably would be present all the time, while groups 
containing special boss songs and sound effects could be loaded as 
needed. MusyK takes care of all data that is defined multiple times, so 
that every item is stored just as often as needed. 

To manage the groups, MusyX uses a stack structure. We will make 
references to it as "soundstack". Groups are pushed onto the stack and 
can be removed by just popping them off the top of the stack. This is 
done to prevent memory fragmentation in internal structures of the sound 
system and to simplify the data management used to prevent multiple 
data storage. 

Data is not actually copied when it‘s pushed onto the stack. The 
programmer has to keep most of the data around as long as the 
references remain on the stack. There are several types of data that the 
programmer has to deal with. The data is saved in separate files to allow 
for more flexible data management. 



Project Data 

Project data is one of two data types, which are not pushed 
onto the soundstack. It is actually used to represent the 
logical structure of the project the musician hands over to the 
programmer, and to enable the programmer (and the 
system) to access all the other data easily. 

Pool Data 

This set of data contains macros and all data that is 
referenced by these, with the exception of samples. The 
musician uses macros to describe the kind of sounds the 
synthesizer is to produce. Since this data is necessary to 
reproduce the sound, it has to be present in RAM all the 
time. The size of this data block is often quite small. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 258 




N64 Programmers Reference 



Sample Data 

This data contains all the samples to be used. It therefore, 
can be quite large. This type of data sometimes can be 
discarded after it has been pushed onto the soundstack. 

This will be the case if the system features a separate sound 
RAM. 

Some systems even allow specifying a ROM location, so 
that the samples do not have to be present in RAM. So does 
the N64. 

Some platforms, like Game Boy, don’t need sample data at 
all or just in a very limited way (Game Boy). 

Sequencer Data 

All the data about the song(s) is stored here. The size very 
much depends on the complexity and length of the song(s) 
contained within. Just the currently played or paused songs 
need to be loaded. The sequencer data itself is not pushed 
onto the stack, but is just specified as a reference while 
pushing a group containing song data onto the stack. 



The pool, sample, and sequencer data sections are always used 
together with the Project Data. There may be multiple sets of these data 
sets in one project file. This is because the data may be split up into 
multiple sections, to limit the amount of memory used at one time. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 259 



08/25/99 



MusyA Audio Tools 



MusfA and MORT Voice Compression 

MORT is currently not included with Musya. Nevertheless, to integrate 
MORT as easily as possible into Musya, the “voicelib” library has been 
implemented. It uses Musya's standard streaming interface to pass the 
decompressed MORT data into Musya’s system. The functions are 
simply a wrapper, to hide the details of the implementation from the 
game application and thereby make things easier for the game 
programmers. 

The voice library introduces a new way to store MORT compressed 
samples. To make the data easier to handle, all MORT compressed 
sample files are joined in one large “MORT directory file”. The tool 
generating this file will also write a header file containing defines, that 
make it possible to reference the MORT samples contained in the 
directory file by their name. 

Each running MORT data stream will need about 5% of the total CPU 
power. The overhead produced by passing the data through Musya is 
minor. The RSP workload for a MORT voice will be less than for a 
standard ADPCM sample, since the decompression takes place on the 
host CPU. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 260 



N64 Programmers Reference 



Performance Impact on the Game Application 



Musya has been designed to offer a maximum of flexibility at a minimum 
of CPU and RSP performance impact. Nevertheless, there are a couple 
of things that one has to keep in mind to yield better results. 

On the average, Musya will use about 0.7% to 0.9% of the CPU's and 
about 0.7% to 0.8% of the RSP's calculation time per active voice in an 
ideal setup. The impact the system has on ROM transfer or RDP 
performance is hard to profile. There are just too many variables in the 
equation. Nevertheless, there are a couple of basic thoughts that may 
help evaluate the situation. 

Musya uses a cache system to optimize ROM transfers of samples. This 
cache is very efficient even at small sizes. A sample set of 3Mb may 
work very well with a cache area of just about 90Kb. The size of the 
cache rarely needs to be larger, but as always this largely depends on 
what is going on in the system. A larger cache may be helpful if you use 
a lot of different and long samples, or your application needs to transfer 
extreme amounts of data over the PI bus. 

The impact on the RDP from the sound generation on the RSP is also 
hard to evaluate. The microcode designed for Musya has been 
optimized to use the RSP's time as little as possible. If your game is 
limited by RDP fill rate, the RSP performance hit for MusyX should not 
affect the RDP too much, since the RSP will be waiting for the RDP to 
finish drawing anyway. The worst situation for the RSP is reached when 
it has a lot of very small triangles to draw. The RSP is very much 
involved in the triangle setup during drawing and will almost never wait 
for the RDP, if the FIFO is large enough. This will cause any RSP 
performance hit to effect the RDP in a very pronounced way. Yet again, 
it’s obvious that one has to evaluate the specific needs of the application. 

Generally, one can say that reducing the amount of voices processed 
tends to have a larger impact on the performance than reducing the 
mixing rate. Musya’s priority system offers a lot of ways to control the 
use of a very small number of voices. Tests have shown that about 20 
voices at 22KFIz are a good compromise, and still allow for big orchestral 
scores if needed. 

Reverb is another element that can cost quite a bit of RSP time. The 
CPU is only indirectly impacted by the increase of DMA traffic to the 
RSP. This impact will usually be very small. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 261 




MusyX Audio Tools 



An average reverb setup while filtering the output will cost about as much 
as a voice on the RSP. Generally, one can say that the reverb 
calculations take more time when more DMA is needed. The worst case 
would obviously be if all 8 reflections are used, and are spread out over a 
very wide range in the reverb buffer. 

All issues up to now have been primarily of importance to the 
programmer, but the musicians have influence on the performance, too. 
Here are some things to think about. 

The SMaL language has been designed with performance in mind. When 
you design macro programs, you’ll notice that these programs are most 
often waiting for something. This “idle” state is obviously the least 
performance eating state. But one can write macros that handle a lot of 
commands in a row, which will lead to a larger performance hit. Common 
sense presents a good rule of thumb. Do what you have to do, but only 
use the features you really need for a specific task. 

The MIDI controller-mapping feature offers a lot of flexibility. 

Nevertheless, one has to keep in mind that the controller data is needed 
every frame, whether new macro commands are handled or not. So, the 
more complex the combinations which are used simultaneously, the 
more calculation time is needed. 

Pitching up samples can cost calculation time. If samples are pitched up 
so far that their required playback frequency is above the mixing rate, the 
system has to provide more data to the resampler than will be output. 
Normally this will have little impact, but in extreme situations it may be 
necessary to consider this. (Keep in mind that, due to memory limitations 
in the RSP, the system cannot handle playback frequencies above twice 
the mixing frequency.) 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 262 





N64 Programmers Reference 



Memory is another resource of which one never has enough. It may be 
useful to know that pitchbend and modulation wheel controllers are 
specially optimized to use up very little memory in song files. All other 
controllers are stored in a simpler, more RAM consuming way. So if you 
are going to use a lot of controller data over time, you should consider 
mapping the input that you want to control to these controllers. 

Each running MORT data stream will need about 5% of the total CPU 
power. The overhead produced by passing the data through MusyK is 
minor. The RSP workload for a MORT voice will be less than the RSP 
workload for a standard sample, since the decompression takes places 
on the host CPU. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 263 



08/25/99 




- Audio Tools 



Requirements for Services Provided to Musyk 



MusyX needs a couple of services provided by the game application. 
Here’s a list of these services and the requirements that MusyX. imposes 
on them. 



VBL Hooks 

MusyK requires two functions from the application to install and remove 
a VBL handler. Musy^i will only use these functions during system 
initialization and shutdown. The VBL handler needs to be called at 50 to 
60Hz. All internal structures and lists are optimized for a minimum calling 
frequency of about 50Hz. A lower frequency would make the system's 
timing far too slow to guarantee proper playback of music, and would 
concentrate the performance hit in a very unsymmetrical fashion. 



IVSemory Allocation 

Musyj C requires basic memory allocation services. These services will 
only be used during system initialization and shutdown, to avoid 
unnecessary memory fragmentation. In addition to the required size of 
the memory block, MusyX. will tell the service routine if the memory block 
will be needed for a long time or if it will be freed shortly using a flag field. 
All memory blocks allocated must be aligned to 16 byte boundaries 
(cache boundaries). 



RSP Yielding 

The system needs a function to start an audio task on the RSP, and one 
to wait for the task to be finished. The function starting the audio task 
should return immediately and leave the "potential waiting for the RSP’s 
yield" to a separate thread. The function should then start the task as 
soon as possible. The wait function will be called by MusyX one frame 
after the audio task start has been issued to the RSP scheduler to be 
implemented by the application. This is done to support the rare instance 
when the RSP can not finish audio processing within one frame. The 
game application should try to ensure that this is a rare exception. 
Nevertheless, the application has total freedom to delay the RSP’s audio 
task start as it sees fit, as long as the audio task is finished within one 
frame. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 264 






N64 Programmers Reference 



DMA Services 

Once a frame, MusyX will issue a list of ROM data blocks to be 
transferred to the game application. This is done during the VBL handler. 
MusyX expects these data packages to be transferred to the specified 
RAM addresses within one frame. How the application takes care of this 
task, is totally up to the game programmer. As with yielding the RSP, 
Musyt only expects that the application handles the request in a 
separate thread. The function called by MusyK should be returned as 
fast as possible. 

One possible way to handle DMA transfers would be to subdivide any 
DMA transfer by the game applications into smaller blocks, so that the 
sound system’s requests can be handled in time, even if a very large 
data block is downloaded by the application. Musyx uses a cache 
system to minimize the amount of data to be transferred. 



M.O.R.T. Services 

The voice library uses the services provided to MusyX. by the game 
application, to allocate buffers and initiate DMA transfers (see 
initialization routines for details). In some modes, the voice library will 
expect to be able to allocate and free memory at run-time. The library 
uses no additional VBL hooks, but installs hooks internally within MrnfA. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 265 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



Reverb Effect Engine - REE 

Like most hardware platforms, the N64 System supports a reverb engine 
to add some hall, echo or delay to the output signal. The architectures 
and possibilities vary greatly from platform to platform. Please refer to 
Appendix 5 for details on the implementation. 



Volume Control 

AhrsyX uses an elaborate scheme to control the volume of both music 
and sound effects. Besides all local volume control, either through MIDI 
velocities or direct specification of a volume to be used for sound effect 
playback, there are a large number of so called "volume groups 11 which 
take care of the master volume control. 

During the development of Musytk, a limited number of master volumes 
(e.g. just separated for music and sound effects) proved to be far too 
limited in today’s complex game environments. By default just one 
volume group is defined. It is used to control the master volume for all 
sound effects. Each time a song is started, a new volume group that 
controls the master volume for that specific song is created. 

In addition to this default behavior, the application programmer may 
define new volume groups for single sound effects or a set of sound 
effects, as well as defining new volume groups to control single tracks 
within a song separately from the rest of the song. Just think of it as a 
large mixer that can be completely software controlled. 

Each volume group actually contains two faders. This is done so that 
crossfades can be performed, while the secondary fader is still available 
for overall volume control. (Crossfades are directly controlled by the main 
fader of each volume group. So, if this fader is manipulated during a 
crossfade, the crossfade may fail.) 

Two master faders, scaling all sound effect volume groups and music 
volume groups respectively, are also implemented. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 266 



N64 Programmers Reference 



IDs 



Musya uses IDs to reference sound effects, songs and groups. These 
IDs are automatically generated during the data conversion process. To 
make them easily accessible from the programmer’s side, a header file is 
generated automatically (either in C or assembler syntax) that contains 
symbolic constants for these IDs. Their names are generated using the 
names for these entities, given to them by the musician. 

In this way, we ensure that both the musician and the programmer have 
a common basis to reference IDs - their names - and that changes in 
the project do not change anything on the programmer’s side of things. 



3D API 

Musya features a complete 3D API. It handles all parameters of SFXs 
that change overtime in a 3D environment. Volume, panning - including 
surround panning - and Doppler effects are calculated in real time. The 
API does not feature any kind of culling mechanism. While SFXs that are 
not audible will not use any voices, they will still be calculated - in case 
they become audible again. The application has to take care of any form 
of scene culling to limit the amount of handled SFXs via the 3D API. 

It specifies SFX as "emitters". These emitters are structures that the 
application has to allocate space for, and that are made known to the 
system using snd_add_ermitter(). The position and orientation of the 
"listeners" is specified using another structure made known to the system 
using snd_add_listener(). There may be more than one listener. Using 
more than one listener makes it impossible for the system to generate a 
Doppler effect, though. For a detailed description of the functions and 
structures see the following Function Section. 

MusyHi uses a standard right-handed coordinate system. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 267 



08/25/99 



N64 Programmers Reference 



Function Section: SOUND 

SNDJNIT 



int snd_init (ULONG playfrq, UBYTE voices, 

UBYTE music, UBYTE sfx, UWORD maxdelay, ULONG flags) ; 



Purpose: 

This function initializes the sound system. It must be called once before 
any other routines of the system are used. This includes the interrupt 
handlers, if they are installed by the application program. Whether or not 
that is the case, depends upon the platform on which you are running. 
See Musician’s Reference for details. 

The system will come up initially, with no voices active and the main 
volume for music and FX down. 



Input: 

ULONG mixfrq 

Specifies the frequency in Hz used to mix all voices. This frequency will 
be the actual playback frequency used with the sound hardware. Invalid 
values will be clipped. See each platform appendix for supported values 
with the various platforms. Be aware that some platforms impose limits 
on how far samples may be pitched up or down. Some playback 
frequencies may be incompatible with the music and or sound effects 
that you try to play back. See Musician’s Reference for details. 

UBYTE voices 

Specifies the maximum number of voices to be mixed at a time. The 
maximum number of voices allowed varies from platform to platform. See 
Musician’s Reference for details. 

UBYTE music 

Specifies the maximum number of voices, of the total amount of voices, 
that can be used by the synthesizer to playback instruments. 

UBYTE sfx 

Specifies the maximum number of voices, of the total amount of voices, 
that can be used by the synthesizer to playback sound effects. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 269 



08/25/99 



Mt i$y'X Audio Tools 



UWORD maxdelay 

Maximum delay size of the reverb engine. On most platforms, the delay 
buffer will be allocated before the actual game is started up, to avoid 
memory fragmentation. The reverb processing is not activated, even if 
values different from zero are specified. 

ULONG flags 

These flags are used to trigger specific behaviors of the sound system. 
Most flags are platform specific and can be found in the Musician’s 
Reference. A few, however, are platform independent. 

SND_FLAGS_DEFAULT 
Default settings are used. 

SND__FLAGS_STEREOONLY 

Any surround processing or multi channel output is disabled. This may 
save calculation time on some platforms. Some platforms may ignore 
this flag. 

SND_FLAGS_NOINTERPOLATION 

Any interpolation will be switched off. This may save calculation time on 
some platforms. Some platforms may ignore this flag. 



Output: 

The function returns a value of 0, if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 270 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_QUIT 



void snd_quit (void) 



Purpose: 

This function exits the sound system and frees all allocated resources. 
IRQ handlers should not be called after this function has been executed, 
if any were manually installed. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 271 



08/25/99 



iOSfM Audio Tools 

SND SHUTDOWN 



void snd shutdown (void) 



Purpose: 

This function exits the sound system in preparation for a reinitialization of 
the system. IRQ handlers should not be called after this function has 
been executed. 



input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 272 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_GET_PLAYBACKINFO 

SND_PLAYBACKINFO ( * SNDCALL) snd_get_playbackinf o (void) 



Purpose: 

This function returns information about the version of the sound system. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

A pointer to the following initialized structure is returned. 

typedef struct _snd_playbackinf o { 



ULONG 


frq; 


// 


frequency used to 
output audio 


BYTE 


stereo ; 


// 


TRUE if output is 
stereo 


UBYTE 


bits ; 


// 


Number of bits per 
sample 


char 


devname [256] ; 


// 


ASCII name of device 


char 


version text [256] 


; // 


ASCII driver name & 
version 



} SND_PLAYBACKINFO ; 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 273 



08/25/99 



MusyJC A uc |jo Tools 



SND_REINIT 

reint SNDCALL snd_reinit (ULONG playfrq, 
UBYTE voices, UBYTE music, UBYTE sfx, 
UWORD maxdelay, ULONG flags) ; 



Purpose: 

This function reinitializes the sound system. It must be called once 
before any other routines of the system are used after a temporary 
shutdown. This includes the interrupt handlers, if they are installed by the 
application program. Whether that is the case, depends on the platform 
you are running on. See Musician’s Reference for details. 

The system will initialize with no voices active and the main volume for 
music and FX down. 

Input: 

ULONG mixfrq 

Specifies the frequency in Hz used to mix all voices. This frequency will 
be the actual playback frequency used with the sound hardware. Invalid 
values will be clipped. See each platform appendix for supported values 
with the various platforms. Be aware that some platforms impose limits 
on how far samples may be pitched up or down. Some playback 
frequencies may be incompatible with the music and or sound effects 
that you try to play back. See Musician’s Reference for details. 

UBYTE voices 

Specifies the maximum number of voices to be mixed at a time. The 
maximum number of voices allowed varies from platform to platform. See 
Musician’s Reference for details. 

UBYTE music 

Specifies the maximum number of voices, of the total amount of voices, 
that can be used by the synthesizer to playback instruments. 

UBYTE sfx 

Specifies the maximum number of voices, of the total amount of voices, 
that can be used by the synthesizer to playback sound effects. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 274 





N64 Programmers Reference 



UWORD maxdelay 

Maximum delay size of the reverb engine. On most platforms, the delay 
buffer will be allocated before the actual game is started up, to avoid 
memory fragmentation. The reverb processing is not activated, even if 
values different from zero are specified. 

ULONG flags 

These flags are used to trigger specific behaviors of the sound system. 
Most flags are platform specific and can be found in the Musician’s 
Reference. A few, however, are platform independent. 

SND_FLAGS_ DEFAULT 
Default settings are used. 

SND_FLAGS_STEREOONLY 

Any surround processing or multi channel output is disabled. This may 
save calculation time on some platforms. Some platforms may ignore 
this flag. 

SND_FLAGS_NOINTERPOLATION 

Any interpolation will be switched off. This may save calculation time on 
some platforms. Some platforms may ignore this flag. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 275 



08/25/99 




U$yJk Audio Tools 



SND_ VOLUME 



void snd_volume (UBYTE volume, UWORD time, 
UBYTE volgroup) 



Purpose: 

This function sets the current volume for any volume groups. The volume 
may be set at once or may be faded to the new setting. A fade does not 
need to be finished before a new one can be started. 



Input: 

UBYTE volume 

Specifies the volume to be used for set / fade. 0=Silence, 127=100%. 
UWORD time 

Specifies the time in ms to fade to the new volume. If zero is specified, 
the volume will be set immediately. This may result in clicking sounds. 

UBYTE volgroup 

Specifies which volume group is to be changed. You may also specify 
one of the constants below to modify a set of volume groups at one time, 
while only using only one call. 

SNDJJSERMUS I C_VOLGROUPS 

SND_USERFX_VOLGROUPS 

SND_USERALL_VOLGROUPS 

Set a new volume for all music, sfx or both volume groups, defined by 
the user. 

SND_MUS I C_VOLGROUPSS 

SND_FX_VOLGROUPS 

SND_ALL_VOLGROUPS 

Set a new volume for all music, sfx or both volume groups, predefined or 
defined by the user. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 276 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_MASTER_ VOLUME 



void snd_master_volume (UBYTE volume, UWORD time, 
UBYTE music, UBYTE fx) 



Purpose: 

This function sets the current volume for the master faders of music or 
sfx. The volume may be set at once or may be faded to the new setting. 
A fade does not need to be finished before a new one can be started. 



Input: 

UBYTE volume 

Specifies the volume to be used for set / fade. 0=SiIence, 127=100%. 
UWORD time 

Specifies the time in ms to fade to the new volume. If zero is specified, 
the volume will be set immediately. This may result in clicking sounds. 

UBYTE music 

Set to TRUE if music master fader should be affected. 

UBYTE sfx 

Set to TRUE if sfx master fader should be affected. 



Output: 

None. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 277 



08/25/99 



/yus/>. Audio Tools 



SND_MONO 



void snd mono (UBYTE mono) 



Purpose: 

Set the system to mono or stereo mode. 



Input: 

UBYTE mono 

If TRUE, all output will be mono. FALSE selects stereo mode. The 
default mode is FALSE. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 278 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_PLAY 



ULONG snd_play (UWORD sgid, UWORD sid, 
void *arrfile, S ND_ P LAY PARA *para) 

Purpose: 

This function starts the playback of a song contained within a song 
group. 



Input: 

UWORD sgid 

Specifies the ID of the song group to be used as a source. 

UWORD sid 

ID that specifies which sequencer file in the specified song group is to be 
used. 

ULONG *arrfile 

Pointer to memory containing sequencer data. Certain alignment 
requirements may apply for certain platforms. 

SND__ PLA YPARA *para 

Pointer to a structure containing various parameters for starting the song. 
This pointer may be set to NULL. In this case, the song will be started 
immediately, and no volume will be set (by default the volume is down). 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 279 



08/25/99 



MwsfM Audio Tools 



typedef struct snd playpara 


{ 




ULONG 


flags ; 


// 


Enable features by 
using these flags 


ULONG 


trackmute [2] ; 


// 


Initial mute settings 


UWORD 


speed; 


// 


Initial speed factor 
(0x100 = 1:1) 


struct 


{ 


// 


Start volume 
information 




UWORD time; 

UBYTE target; 








} volume; 






UBYTE 


num seqvoldef; 


// 


Number of non- 
standard volume group 
tracks 


SND_SEQVOLDEF *seqvoldef; 


// 


List of tracks and 








volume groups 


UBYTE 


num faded; 


// 


Number of entries to 
the fade list 


UBYTE 


* faded; 







} SND_PLAYPARA; 



The flags field defines which subset of parameters is active at any given 
time. The following values are defined. 

SND_PLAYPARA__DEFAULT 

No parameters are valid. 

SND_PLAYPARA_TRACKMUTE 

The trackmute fields are active. Each cleared bit in these two ULONGs 
defines a track to be muted. 

SND_PLAYPARA_SPEED 

The speed field is active. A value of 0x100 selects normal speed. Lower 
values slow the song down. Higher levels speed it up. 

SND_PLAYPARA_VOLUME 

This flag turns on the basic volume control. The time and target values 
become active. Target specifies the volume level at the end of the fade, 
while time specifies the time in milliseconds that fade should take. A 
value of zero will simply set the new volume immediately. 

SND_PLAYPARA SEQVOLDEF 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 280 





N64 Programmers Reference 



Each track in an arrangement may be controlled by its very own volume 
group. This flag enables one to control this feature in detail. If the flag is 
set, the following fields have to be initialized. 



Num_seqvoldef has to be initialized with the number of tracks to which 
the non default settings should be applied. The seqvoldef field is a 
pointer to an array of SND_SEQVOLDEF structures that define all 
parameters for the specific tracks. 



typedef struct _snd_seqvoldef { 
UBYTE track; // 

UBYTE vo 1 group; // 

} SND_SEQVOLDEF ; 



Target track (0-63) 
Volume group to 
assign / use 



Num_faded contains the number of tracks that should be faded. One 
may enable or disable fading for each track, to enable the programmer to 
fade in and out separate tracks without having to setup all volume groups 
manually. The faded field contains a pointer to a list of track numbers. 



SND PLAYPARA PAUSE 



The song will be "started" in pause mode. No audio from the song will be 
audible until you restart it. 



Output: 

The function returns a 32-bit sequencer ID if successful, if not it returns 

SND SEQ ERROR ID. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 281 



08/25/99 




Muzyji Audio Tools 



SND_STOP 

void snd_stop (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

Stops the song currently playing with the specified ID. If the song is not 
playing anymore, nothing happens. 

Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID that specifies which sequencer is to be stopped. 

Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 282 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_ PAUSE 

void snd_pause (ULONG seqid) 

Purpose: 

Pauses the song currently playing with the specified ID. If the song is not 
playing anymore, nothing happens. 

Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID that specifies which sequencer is to be paused. 

Output: 

None. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 283 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



SND_SILENCE 

void snd silence (void) 



Purpose: 

All voices (Music & FX) will be stopped immediately. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 284 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND SS IDLE 



UBYTE snd is idle (void) 



Purpose: 

Checks to see if all activity in the sound system has ended. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

The function returns TRUE if there is no activity left in the sound system 
and it’s ready to be shut down. It returns FALSE otherwise. 



©1999 Factors LLC 



Appendix 3: 285 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 

SND_CR0SSFADE 

void snd_crossf ade (SND_CROSSFADE *ci, 
ULONG *new_seq_id) ; 



Purpose: 

Initiates a crossfade between two pieces of music. 



Input: 

SND_CROSSFADE *ci 

Pointer to a structure containing all necessary information to perform the 
crossfade. 

typedef struct _snd_crossf ade { 

ULONG seq_idl; 

UWORD timel; 

ULONG seq_id2 ; 

UWORD time 2; 

void *arr2 ; 

UWORD gid2 ; 

UWORD sid2; 

UBYTE vol2 ; 

ULONG trackmute2 [2] ; 

UWORD speed2 ; 



UBYTE flags; 

} SND_CROSSFADE ; 

The song specified by the ID passed in seqjdl will be faded down in the 
time specified by timel. Flags defines what is to be done to it at this 
moment. 

SND_CROSSFADE_STOP 

Stop song after fade down is finished. 

SND_CRO S S FADE_P AUS E 

Pause song after fade down is finished. 



// Mute bits (see 
snd_mute ( ) ) 

// Initial speed 
(of new song) 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 286 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_CROS S FADE_MUTE 

Mute song after fade down (no voices will be allocated), but continue 
handling (playing) it. 



A couple of other flags define how the new song is to be faded up. 

SND_CROS S FADE_CONT INUE 

The new song is in paused state. Continue playback from that position. 
The ID of that song must be specified in seq_id2, which is otherwise 
unused. 

SND_CROSSFADE_PAUSENEW 

The new song will be started, but immediately put into paused state. 

SND_CROSSFADE_TRACKMUTE 

The trackmute fields will be used to setup the track muting of the new 
song. 

SND_CROSS FAD E_S PEED 

The new song will be started with a playback speed specified in the 
speed2 field. 

SND_CROS S FADE JMUTENEW 

Start new song, but mute it completely, immediately after its start. 



In all cases where a completely new song is started the arr2 field must 
be initialized with a pointer to the arrangement data. Gid must contain 
the ID of the group which contains the settings for the new song. Sid 
contains the ID of the song itself. 

The volume at end of fade in the time time2 is always to be specified in 
vo!2. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 287 




MusyX Audio Tools 



Crossfades can be synchronized to certain points in a song. The 
musician can place special controllers into the MIDI data representing 
the song. If the flag, 

SND_CROS S FADE_S YNC 

is set, the crossfade will be delayed until the next controller of that type is 
detected. 

Crossfades are controlled directly by the faders. If you reuse a fader 
while a crossfade is in progress, the crossfade may not succeed. This 
should rarely be necessary, though. On the one hand the system's 
master faders can still be used and, on the other hand, each volume 
group has two faders. A standard fader and a so-called "pause" fader. 
The later can be freely used, even if a crossfade is in progress. 

ULONG *new_seq_id 

Pointer to a ULONG that will be assigned the new sequencer ID as soon 
as it is available. A temporary ID will be assigned immediately, while the 
real ID will be assigned at some point during the crossfade. This variable 
must be present during the crossfade for that reason. The temporary ID 
can be used for most control purposes, as long as no real ID is 
generated. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 288 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_CROSSFADE_DONE 

UBYTE snd_crossf ade_done (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

Check if a crossfade has finished. 



Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID that specifies which sequencer is to be checked. The ID specified is 
the one of the new song, not the old one. 



Output: 

The function returns TRUE if the crossfade is complete, otherwise 
FALSE is returned. 



©1999 Factors LLC 



Appendix 3: 289 



08/25/99 



JlilJSpC Audio Tools 



SND CONTINUE 



void snd_continue (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

Resumes playback of a paused song. 



Input: 

ULONG seqjd 

ID of the song / sequencer to be continued. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 290 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_MUTE 

void snd_mute (ULONG seqid, ULONG maskl, ULONG mask2) 

Purpose: 

This function mutes / turns on volume for single tracks from the 
sequencer file. The 64 tracks are represented by 32 Bits in 2 ULONGs. 

Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of sequencer to be affected. 

ULONG maskl 

Mute mask for lower 32 tracks. A 0 mutes the corresponding channel. 
ULONG mask2 

Mute mask for upper 32 tracks. A 0 mutes the corresponding channel. 

Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 291 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



SND_SPEED 



void snd_mute (ULONG seqid, UWORD speed) 



Purpose: 

This function changes the playback speed of the specified sequencer. 



Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of sequencer to be affected. 

UWORD speed 

Speed to be set. A value of 0x100 will reset the speed to normal. Lower 
values will slow down the playback, higher values will speed it up. 

Output: 

None. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 292 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_SEQLOOP 

void snd_seqloop (ULONG seqid, UBYTE on) 



Purpose: 

This function allows the looping of songs to be disabled. By default 
looping is enabled, if the musician defined loop locators. Disabling 
looping may be useful if e.g. a song is meant to loop a couple of times 
before finally coming to an end. 

Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of sequencer to be affected. 

UBYTE on 

A value of TRUE will enable looping (default), FALSE will disable it. 

Output: 

The function will return TRUE on success, FALSE otherwise. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 293 



08/25/99 



SND_GET SEQLOOPCNT 



UWORD snd_get_seqloopcnt (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

This function retrieves how often the playing song has looped. 



Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of sequencer to report. 



Output: 

Returns the number of loops taken by the song. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 294 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_GET_SEQVALID 

UBYTE snd_get_seqvalid (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

This function is used to determine if the song is actually playing or still in 
a temporary state. Songs may be in a temporary state immediately after 
or during crossfades 



input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of song / sequencer to report. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if the sequencer actually is playing the song specified by 
the ID. FALSE is returned if the ID is temporary. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 295 



08/25/99 



MvWfM Audio Tools 



SND_SEQ_ VOLUME 



void snd_seq_volume (UBYTE volume, UWORD time, ULONG 
seq_id, UBYTE mode) ; 



Purpose: 

This function is used to set / fade the volume of the specified sequencer / 
song. 



Input: 

UBYTE volume 

Specifies the volume to be used for set / fade. 0=Silence, 127=100%. 
UWORD time 

Specifies the time in ms to fade to the new volume. If zero is specified, 
the volume will be set immediately. This may result in clicking sounds. 

ULONG seqid 

ID of sequencer to be affected. 

UBYTE mode 

Mode of fade operation. The following modes are defined: 

SND__SEQVOL_CONTINUE 

Continue playback of the current song when fade is finished. 

SND_SEQVOL_STOP 

Stop current song when fade is finished. 

SND_SEQVOL_PAUSE 

Pause song when fade is finished. 

SND_SEQVOL_MUTE 

Mute all tracks of the current song when fade ends. The song will 
continue playing although muted. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 296 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_GET_SEQVOLGROUP 

UBYTE snd_get_seqvolgroup (ULONG seqid) 



Purpose: 

This function is used to determine the volume group used to control the 
referenced song / sequencer. If non default groups have been assign by 
the user, the default one will be returned. 



Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of song / sequencer to report. 

Output: 

The volume group used to control the default song / sequencer volume. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 297 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



SND_ASSIGN_VGROUP2TRACK 

void snd_assign_vgroup2 track (ULONG seq_id, 
UBYTE track, UBYTE vgroup) ; 



Purpose: 

Assign a non standard volume group to the specified track of the given 
song / sequencer. 



Input: 

ULONG seqid 

ID of song / sequencer to affect. 

UBYTE track 
Track to be affected. 

UBYTE vgroup 

Volume group to assign to track. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 298 






N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_FXSTART 



ULONG snd_fxstart (UWORD fid, UBYTE vol. 



UBYTE pan) 



Purpose: 

Starts a sound effect. 



Input: 

UWORD fid 

Specifies the ID of the sound effect to be used. 

UBYTE vol 

Specifies the default volume to be used with this sound effect. This value 
may or may not be used by the sound effect. (0=Silence, 127=100%, 
0xFF=Use default volume) 

UBYTE pan 

Specifies the default panning to be used with this sound effect. This 
value may or may not be used by the sound effect. (0=Left, 64=Center, 
127=Right, 128=Surround, 0xFF= Use default panning) 



Output: 

Returns snd_id_error if failed, a 32-bit voice ID if successful. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 299 



08/25/99 



Musy.^ Audio Tools 



SND_FXKEYOFF 



int snd_fxkeyof f (ULONG vid) 



Purpose: 

Send a "Key Off" to the sound effect with the specified voice ID. A "Key 
off" is used to signal the sound effect to go into its final phase. In most 
cases it will be used to stop the sound effect. 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 300 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_FXCHECK 

UBYTE snd fxcheck (ULONG vid) 



Purpose: 

Test if the given sound effect is currently processed by the sound 
system. 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 



Output: 

Returns the ID passed to it if sound effect is currently active, 
SND_ID_ERROR otherwise. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 301 



08/25/99 



' : ■ : - - udio Tools 



SND_FXPANNING 



int snd_f xpanning (ULONG vid, UBYTE pan) 



Purpose: 

Set new panning offset for the specified sound effect. The default 
panning offset after start is 64. (0=Left, 64=Center, 127=Right, 
128=Surround) A value of 128 should no longer be used. It’s still 
supported for now to maintain compatibility with older versions. 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 
UBYTE pan 

The new panning value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 302 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_FXSURROUNDPANNING 

int snd_f xsurroundpanning (ULONG vid, UBYTE pan) 

Purpose: 

Set new surround panning offset for the specified sound effect. The 
default panning offset after start is 0. (0=Front, 64=Center, 127=Back) 

Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 

UBYTE pan 

The new surround panning value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 303 



08/25/99 



: ll SyX Audio Tools 



SND_FXVOLUME 



int snd fxvolume (ULONG vid, UBYTE vol) 



Purpose: 

Set new volume for the specified soundeffect. The default volume set 
after start is 127. (0=Silence, 127=100%) 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 
UBYTE vol 

The new volume value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 304 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND FXPITCHBEND 



int snd_f xpitchbend (ULONG vid, UWORD pb) 



Purpose: 

Set new pitchbend value for the specified sound effect. The default 
pitchbend value set after start is $2000. ($2000=No Pitch offset, lower 
values pitch down, higher up). 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 
UWORD pb 

The new pitchbend value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 305 



08/25/99 



MwsyA Audio Tools 



SND_FXMODULATION 

int snd_fxmodulat ion (ULONG vid, UWORD mod) 



Purpose: 

Set new modulation value for the specified sound effect. The default 
modulation value set after start is 0. (0=l_owest, 16383=Highest) 

Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 

UWORD mod 

The new modulation value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 306 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND FXPEDAL 



int snd_fxpedal (ULONG vid, UBYTE pedal) 



Purpose: 

Set new pedal state for the specified sound effect. 



Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 

UBYTE pedal 

The new pedal state. If the pedal controller is still mapped to the pedal 
input of the synthesizer (see Musicians Reference), a value lower than 
0x3F will clear the pedal state, while a larger value will set it. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 307 



08/25/99 




MvSfA Audio Tools 



SND_FXDOPPLER 



int snd_fxpitchbend (ULONG vid, UWORD doppler) 



Purpose: 

Set new Doppler value for the specified sound effect. The default 
Doppler value set after start is $2000. ($2000=No Pitch offset, lower 
values pitch down, higher up). In contrast to the pitchbend, the Doppler 
effect is applied by scaling the frequency, rather than offsetting the pitch 
by offsetting the current key. 



input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 
UWORD doppler 

The new Doppler value to be applied to the effect. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 308 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_FXREVERB 

int snd_fxreverb (ULONG vid, UBYTE rvol) 

Purpose: 

Set new reverb volume for the specified sound effect. 

Input: 

ULONG vid 

The voice ID obtained through snd_fxstart(). 

UBYTE rvol 

The new reverb volume to set. 



Output: 

Returns 0 if successful. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 309 



08/25/99 



MwsyJk Audio Tools 



SND_PUSHGROUP 

UBYTE snd_pushgroup (void *prj_data, UWORD gid, 
void *samples, void *sampdir, void *pool) ; 



Purpose: 

Push group data onto soundstack. See general information section for 
details. 



Input: 

void *prjdata 
Pointer to project data. 

UWORD gid 

ID of the group to be pushed. 
void *samples 

Pointer to sample data / ID to reference data. 
void *sampdir 

Pointer to sample directory containing data to locate samples within the 
sample data. 

void *pool 

Pointer to pool data. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 310 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_POPGROUP 

UBYTE snd_popgroup (void) 

Purpose: 

Pop group from soundstack. See general information section for details. 

Input: 

None. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if successful. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 311 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 

SND_READFLAG 

SWORD snd_readf lag (UBYTE num) 



Purpose: 

Read flag value from synthesizer. Flags may be used to signal certain 
conditions of the synthesizer to the main program. There are 16 flags. 



Input: 

UBYTE num 

Number of flag to read from. 



Output: 

Returns value obtained from flag. Default after startup is zero. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 312 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_WRITEFLAG 

void. snd_writef lag (UBYTE num, SWORD value) 

Purpose: 

Writes flag value to synthesizer. Flags may be used to signal certain 
conditions of the synthesizer to the main program. There are 16 flags. 

Input: 

UBYTE num 

Number of flag to write to. 

SWORD value 

Value to write to specified flag. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 313 



08/25/99 




MitsyA. Audio Tools 



SND_ALLOC_STREAM 

ULONG snd_alloc__stream (UBYTE prio, void *buffer, 
ULONG size, ULONG frq, UBYTE vol, UBYTE pan, 
UBYTE span, UBYTE fxvol, 

UBYTE ( *update_f unction) (SWORD *bufferl, 

ULONG lenl , SWORD *buffer2, ULONG len2, 

ULONG user) , ULONG user) 



Purpose: 

Allocates a voice for stream playback. The allocated voice will no longer 
be available to the synthesizer for playing instruments or sound effects 
until it’s explicitly freed. 



Input: 

UBYTE prio 

Priority for allocating the voice to be used for playing the stream. To 
guarantee allocation, the priority should be set as high as possible. 

void *buffer 

Pointer to buffer used to stream the data into the voice. The buffer is 
used as a simple ring buffer. 

ULONG size 

Size of the ring buffer in samples. 

ULONG frq 

Frequency to be used for playback. 

UBYTE vol 

Volume used for playback (0-127). 

UBYTE pan 

Panning used for playback (0-127). 

UBYTE span 

Surround panning used for playback (0-127). 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 314 






UBYTE fxvol 

Reverb volume used for playback (0-127). 



N64 Programmers Reference 



UBYTE (*update_function)(SWORD *buffer1,ULONG lenl, SWORD 
*buffer2,ULONG len2,ULONG user) 

Pointer to a function that will be called by Musy^ each time that the 
buffer has to be updated. Bufferl and lenl define the 1 st area to be 
updated, while buffer2 and Ien2 define the 2 nd area. Two areas are 
necessary, since the buffer is used as a ring buffer, and the area to be 
updated may therefore wrap around. Len2 will be zero if no second area 
is needed. User is a value specified by the application, see below). 

ULONG user 

Value to be passed to the update function. E.g. it can be used to identify 
different instances of streams to the update function. 



Output: 

The function returns a handle to the stream if successful and 

SND ID ERROR if not. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 315 



08/25/99 



JSyM A uc |j 0 Tools 



SND_STREAM_ALLOCLENGTH 

ULONG snd_stream_alloclength(ULONG num) 



Purpose: 

Return the number of bytes to be allocated for a stream buffer, 
containing the specified number of samples. This may or may not be 
identical to the number of samples multiplied by the number of bytes per 
sample. The reason for this is that some platforms need a couple of extra 
samples that are managed automatically to ensure proper looping. 



Input: 

ULONG num 

Number of samples in the buffer. 



Output: 

Size of the buffer that has to be allocated in bytes. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 316 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND STREAM MIXPARAMETER 



void snd_stream_mixparameter (ULONG stid, 

UBYTE vol, UBYTE pan, UBYTE span, UBYTE fxvol) 



Purpose: 

Change stream playback parameters during playback. 



input: 

ULONG stid 

Handle of stream to be manipulated. 
UBYTE vol 

New volume to be set. 

UBYTE pan 

New panning to be set. 

UBYTE span 

New surround panning to be set. 
UBYTE fxvol 

New reverb volume to be set. 



Output: 

None. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 

Appendix 3: 317 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



SND_FREE_STREAM 

void snd free stream (ULONG stid) 



Purpose: 

Free an allocated stream. The voice will be made accessible to the 
synthesizer, again. 



Input: 

ULONG stid 

Handle of stream to be freed. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 318 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_ACTIVATE_REVERB 

void snd_activate_reverb (SND_REVERB *rev) ; 



Purpose: 

Activate reverb engine with the given parameters. Only signals on the 
reverb or "auxiliary 11 bus are put through the engine. 



Input: 

SND_REVERB *rev 

Pointer to a structure describing the desired reverb effect. 

typedef struct _snd__reverb { 



UWORD 


buf size; 




UWORD 


ref_of f [SND_MAX_ 


_REFLECTIONS] ; 


UBYTE 


ref_vol [SND_MAX_ 


_REFLECTIONS] ; 


UBYTE 


ref num; 




UBYTE 


f b vol ; 




UBYTE 


filter; 




SWORD 


filter coef [4] ; 




} SND 


_REVERB ; 





Buf_size specifies the total size of the reverb delay buffer in milliseconds. 
This size must be smaller or equal to the maximum size specified at 
system initialization. 

Ref_num must be set to the number of reflections to be used. The 
maximum number of reflections in current implementations is 8. 

Fb_vol specifies the volume of the feedback into the buffer. The buffer 
output is continuously fed back into the buffer together with new input. If 
this volume is specified too high, there is the danger of a so-called 
"resonant catastrophe 11 . 

A FIR filter may be used to filter the output signal. Filter can be set to 
snd_filter_on to enable the filter or snd_filter_off to disable it. 

If it is enabled, one must specify the filter coefficients to be used. These 
values are passed in the filter_coef[ ] array. The values are specified as 
integers in SI 5 format. A value of OxFFFF equals about 1 .0. 

Reflections are specified using two arrays. Each pair of array elements 
specifies one reflection. The ref_off[ ] array contains the amount of delay 
for each reflection in milliseconds. The ref_vol[ ] array contains the 
volume of each reflection. A value of 127 specifies full volume. A volume 
of zero is possible, but should be avoided for performance reasons. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 319 



08/25/99 




Mmyj.. Audio Tools 



Generally one can say, that the more reflections used and the more 
these reflections are spread out over the buffer, the bigger the 
performance hit will be. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 320 




N64 Programmers Reference 

SND_DEACTIVATE_REVERB 

void snd_deact ivate_reverb (void) ; 



Purpose: 

Stop reverb processing. 

Input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 321 



08/25/99 




hitJSyM. Audio Tools 



SND_ADD_LISTENER 

void snd_add_listener (SND_LISTENER *li, 
SND_FVECTOR *pos, SND_FVECTOR *dir, 

SND_FVE CTOR * heading, SND_FVECTOR *up, 

float front_sur, float back_sur, 

float soundspeed, ULONG flags, UBYTE vol) ; 



Purpose: 

Add a listener structure to the list of listeners. 



Input: 

SND_LISTENER *// 

Pointer to a structure defining the parameters of the listener to be 
added. 

typedef struct _snd_listener { 



struct snd 


listener *next ; 


struct snd 


listener *prev; 


ULONG 


flags ; 


SND_FVECTOR 


POS; 


SND_FVECTOR 


dir ; 


SND_FVECTOR 


heading; 


SND_FVECTOR 


right ; 


SND_FVECTOR 


down ; 


SND_FMATRIX 


mat ; 


float 


surround dis front 


float 


surround dis back; 


float 


soundspeed; 


float 


vol ; 



} SND_LISTENER ; 

All values are initialized by the called function. The structure is not 
copied by the function. It has to be kept around as long as the listener is 
active. 

SND_FVECTOR *pos 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial position of the listener. 
SND_FVECTOR *dir 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial movement direction of the 
listener. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 322 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_FVECTOR heading 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial normalized viewing direction of 
the listener. 



SND_FVECTOR *up 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial normalized up vector of the 
listener. 

Float front_sur 

Distance at which an emitter will only be audible on the front channels. 
Float back_sur 

Distance at which an emitter will only be audible on the surround 
channel. 

ULONG flags 

Flags contains one or more of the following flags: 

S ND__L I S TENE R_D E F AUL T 

No Doppler effect is calculated. The speed of sound does not need to be 
set, anymore. This mode should be chosen if more than one listener is 
specified. 

SND_LISTENER_DOPPLERFX 

Doppler effects are calculated. 

Float soundspeed 

Defines the speed of sound for use in Doppler effects. It’s specified in 
“units” per second, and will depend on the game's world coordinate 
system. Float soundspeed must be set to "less than" the speed of sound 
(in game world coordinates). 

UBYTE vol 

Overall volume value to be applied to all emitters that are audible to this 
listener. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 323 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



SND_UPDATE_LISTENER 

void snd_update_listener ( SND_LISTENER *li, 
SND_FVECTOR *pos, SND_FVECTOR *dir, 

SND_FVECTOR *heading, SND_FVECTOR *up, UBYTE vol) ; 



Purpose: 

Update a listener structure. 



Input: 

SND_LISTENER *// 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the listener. 
SND_FVECTOR *pos 

Pointer to a vector containing the new position of the listener. 
SND_FVECTOR *dir 

Pointer to a vector containing the new movement direction of the listener. 
SND_FVECTOR * heading 

Pointer to a vector containing the new normalized viewing direction of the 
listener. 

SND_FVECTOR *up 

Pointer to a vector containing the new normalized up vector of the 
listener. 

UBYTE vol 

Overall volume value to be applied to all emitters that are audible to this 
listener. 



Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 324 




N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_REMOVE_LISTENER 

void snd_remove_listener (SND_LISTENER *li) ; 



Purpose: 

Remove a listener structure from the sound systems list. The structure 
may be discarded after calling this function. 



input: 

SND_LISTENER *li 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the listener. 

Output: 

None. 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 325 



08/25/99 




JitfSyX Audio Tools 



SND_ADD_EMITTEREX 

ULONG add_emitterex (SND_EMITTER *em, 
SND_FVECTOR *pos , SND_FVECTOR *dir, 
float max_dis, float comp, ULONG flags, 
UWORD fxid, UWORD groupid, UBYTE maxvol , 
UBYTE minvol) ; 



Purpose: 

Add an emitter structure to the list of emitters. 



Input: 

SND_EMITTER *em 

Pointer to a structure defining the parameters of the emitter to be added. 

typedef struct _snd_emitter { 

struct _snd_emitter *next ; 

struct _snd emitter *prev; 

ULONG 

SND_FVECTOR 
SND_FVECTOR 
float 
float 
float 
float 
ULONG 
ULONG 
UWORD 

UWORD 
float 

} SND_EMITTER; 

All values are initialized by the called function. The structure is not 
copied by the function. It has to be kept around as long as the emitter is 
active. 

SND_FVECTOR *pos 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial position of the emitter. 
SND_FVECTOR *dir 

Pointer to a vector containing the initial movement direction of the 
emitter. 



flags ; 

pos; 

dir; 

max_dis ; 
maxvol ; 
minvol ; 
volpush; 
vid; 
group ; 
fxid; 

vollevel_ cnt ; 
fade ; 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 326 




N64 Programmers Reference 



float max_dis 

Maximum distance at which the emitter will still be audible. 
float comp 

Normally the volume will be lowered linearly over distance. At times it 
may be desirable to keep the volume up for some time and later fade it 
down faster. MusyX. offers both methods. This value allows fading 
between both extremes. A value of zero will use only the linear method. 
Higher values will switch more and more toward the “compressed” form. 
A value of 1 uses only the “compressed” method. 

ULONG flags 

The following flags are defined to influence the behavior of the emitter. 

SND_EMITTER_DE FAULT 

No special features are activated. 

SND_EM I TTER_CONT INOUS 

Update all parameters continuously. If this is not set, the volume, 
panning and Doppler values will just be calculated at the start of the 
emitter. This may be used to save calculation time with short time SFX. 

SND_EMITTER_RESTAR TABLE 

The SFX handled by the emitter may be restarted after being stopped for 
any reason. This can be used to reactivate e.g. an engine hum after an 
explosion has interrupted it for a short time. 

SND_EMITTER_PAUSABLE 

If the emitter is no longer in the audible range it may be stopped. If this 
flag is not set, the SFX will remain active although its volume is all the 
way down. This costs valuable voices, but may be necessary to run long 
term sound effects. 

SND_EMITTER_DOPPLERFX 

If this flag is set, the emitter will be included into the Doppler effect 
calculations of all listeners having Doppler calculations enabled. 

SND_EMITTER_HARDSTART 

Continues emitters are by default faded in over a short period of time. 
This is done to avoid any popping artifact and similar effects. This flag 
disables the default effect. The feature is currently not implemented. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 327 



iWlfSyJC Audio Tools 



UWORD fxid 

ID of the SFX to be used by the emitter. 

UWORD groupid 

A value used to group emitters together. Emitters that share the same 
group are all fighting for the available voices on the basis of their volume 
and time being audible. The group ID specified here has nothing to do 
with the groups used to store data. It is simply an integer between 0 and 
65535 that is chosen by the game application to identify such an emitter 
group. 

Emitters of different groups just use the normal priority system. 



UBYTE maxvol 

Volume to be used at maximum audible range. 
UBYTE minvol 

Volume to be used at the position of the listener. 



Output: 

The function returns a handle to the SFX started by the emitter. This 
value may be SND_ID_ERROR without any failure. Continuous emitters 
are not immediately started sometimes. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 328 





N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_ADD_EMITTER 

ULONG snd_add_emitter (SND_EMITTER *em, 
SND_FVECTOR *pos, SND_FVECTOR *dir, 
float max_dis, float comp, ULONG flags, 
UWORD fxid, UBYTE maxvol , UBYTE minvol); 



Purpose: 

Add an emitter structure to the list of emitters. 



Input: 

All parameters are the same as the ones listed for 
snd_add_emitterex. The groupid parameter of this function is 
internally set, so that each SFX forms its own emitter group. 



Output: 

The function returns a handle to the SFX started by the emitter. This 
value may be SND_ID_ERROR without any failure. Sometimes 
continuous emitters are not started immediately. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 329 



08/25/99 



's>* Audio Tools 



SND_UPOATE_EMITTER 

UBYTE snd_update_emitter (SND_EMITTER *em, 
SND_FVECTOR *pos, SND_FVECTOR *dir, UBYTE maxvol) ; 



Purpose: 

Update an emitter structure. 



input: 

SND_EMITTER *em 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the emitter. 
SND_FVECTOR *pos 

Pointer to a vector containing the new position of the emitter. 

SND_ FVEC T OR *dir 

Pointer to a vector containing the new movement direction of the emitter. 
UBYTE maxvol 

Volume to be used at position of listener for this emitter. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if successful, FALSE otherwise. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 330 






N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_REMOVE_EMITTER 

UBYTE snd_remove_emitter (SND_EMITTER *em) ; 

Purpose: 

Remove an emitter structure from the sound systems list. The structure 
may be discarded after calling this function. 

Input: 

SND_EMITTER *em 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the emitter. 

Output: 

Returns TRUE if successful, FALSE otherwise. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 331 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



SND_CHECK_EMITTER 

UBYTE snd_check_emitter (SND_EMITTER *em) ; 



Purpose: 

Check if the specified emitter is currently active or not. 



Input: 

SND_EMITTER *em 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the emitter. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if emitter is active, FALSE otherwise. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 332 






N64 Programmers Reference 



SND_EMITTEFt_FXID 

ULONG snd_emitter_f xid (SND_EMITTER *em) ; 

Purpose: 

Get the handle of the SFX handled by the emitter specified. 



Input: 

SND_EMITTER *em 

Pointer to a structure containing the current settings of the emitter. 



Output: 

If the SFX is active, the function will return its handle. If not 
SND_ID_ERROR will be returned. Even the latter value may be passed 
to all SFX functions without any negative side effects. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 333 



08/25/99 



Mu$yX Audio Tools 



Function Section: Voicelib MORT Interface 

VOICE_INIT 



void voice_in.it (ULONG flags) ; 



Purpose: 

This function initializes the voice library and MORT. It must be called 
once, before any other routines of the library are used. MusyK must be 
fully initialized before this function is called. 



Input: 

ULONG flags 

These flags are used to trigger specific behaviors of the voice library. 

VOICE _FLAGS_DEF AULT 

Default settings are used. Buffers for streaming MORT data will be 
allocated at run-time (during the call to voice_start()) and will be freed at 
run-time. This, depending on the implementation of the memory 
allocation system, may lead to memory fragmentation. 

VOICE_FLAGS_PREALLOCATE_BUFFERS 

All buffers needed to stream MORT data are allocated during 
initialization and stay allocated until the library is shutdown using 
voice_exit(). 

Output: 

None. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 334 





N64 Programmers Reference 



VOICE EXIT 



void voice exit (void) 



Purpose: 

This function exits the voice library and frees all allocated resources. 
Voices still active will be stopped. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 335 



08/25/99 




MittyX Audio Tools 



VOICE_SET_DIRECTORY 

UBYTE voice_set_directory (void *vdir, void *vdata) 



Purpose: 

This function tells the voice library where the MORT directory data file 
can be found. 

Both vdir and vdata can be RAM addresses or ROM offsets. If vdir is a 
ROM offset, the function assumes that all data of the MORT directory is 
still in ROM. It will use the MusyX. DMA services to download the MORT 
directory data table, without the actual compressed sample data section, 
into an allocated RAM area. (This may take as much as 2 frames, due to 
the nature of the MusyX. DMA services.) In this configuration the second 
parameter is ignored and should be left at NULL. 

If vdir specifies a RAM address, it’s assumed that the MORT directory 
table is already downloaded into RAM. (It’s always located at the very 
beginning of the data and its size is defined using the 
MORTDIR_DIRECTORY_LENGTH constant generated by 
MORTDIR.EXE.) Whether or not the actual MORT sample data is still in 
ROM is determined by examining the second parameter. If vdata 
specifies the same RAM location as vdir, it’s assumed that all data is in 
RAM. If vdata specifies the “original” ROM offset of the whole MORT 
directory file, it’s assumed that the table part has been downloaded to 
RAM but the samples are still in ROM. 

Both addresses / offsets are passed through the MusyX. address 
translation hook to enable the user to abstract data location via handles, 
if desired. 

Input: 

void *vdir 

Pointer to the logical table part of the MORT directory file. 
void *vdata 

Pointer to the MORT directory file. (Used only if vdir specifies a RAM 
address. Keep it printing to NULL otherwise.) 



Output: 

The function returns TRUE if successful or FALSE otherwise. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 336 






N64 Programmers Reference 



VOICE_START 

ULONG voice_start (ULONG dir_index, ULONG frq, 
UBYTE prio, UBYTE vol, UBYTE pan, UBYTE span, 
UBYTE fxvol) 



Purpose: 

This function starts a MORT compressed sample on a MusyK voice. The 
voice will be registered as an SFX voice. The current implementation 
allows two voices to be used simultaneously. 



Input: 

ULONG dirjndex 

Index of the MORT sample within the MORT directory file to be played. A 
header file containing these indices, in symbolic form, is generated by 
MORTDIR.EXE. 

ULONG frq 

Specifies the frequency to be used to playback the MORT sample. If you 
specify VOICE_DEFAULT_FRQ, the frequency stored within the MORT 
directory file will be used (only 8 or 16 kFIz are supported). Sample rates 
above 22KFIz may cause clicking artifacts, due to the limited size of the 
stream buffers. 

UBYTE prio 

Priority to be used to allocate the voice into which the data will be 
streamed. To “guarantee” a successful allocation, you should specify a 
priority of 255. Lower values mean a lower priority. 

UBYTE vol 

Volume to be used to play the MORT sample. (0-127, 127 = 100%) 
UBYTE pan 

Panning to be used to play the MORT sample. (0-127, left->right) 

UBYTE span 

Surround panning to be used to play the MORT sample. 

(0-127, front->back) 

UBYTE fxvol 

FX (or AUX) Volume to be used to play the MORT sample (0-127, 127 = 
100%). In the current implementation, this is the “reverb volume”. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 3: 337 



Audio Tools 



Output: 

The function returns a 32-bit handle if successful or VOICE_ERROR if 
not. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 338 




N64 Programmers Reference 



VOICE_STOP 

UBYTE voice_stop (ULONG handle) 



Purpose: 

Stop a MORT sample which is playing. 



Input: 

ULONG handle 

Handle of the MORT sample voice to be stopped. 



Output: 

Returns TRUE if successful, FALSE otherwise. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 339 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



VOICE_CHECKACTIVE 

UBYTE voice checkactive (ULONG handle) 



Purpose: 

This function checks if the specified handle still refers to an active voice. 
The voice will be active a couple of frames before and after audio is 
audible. 



Input: 

ULONG handle 

Specifies the voice to be checked. 

Output: 

The function returns TRUE if the voice is active and FALSE otherwise . 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 3: 340 






N64 Programmers Reference 



VOICE_ PARAMETERS 



UBYTE voice_parameters (ULONG handle, UBYTE vol, 
UBYTE pan, UBYTE span, UBYTE fxvol) 

Purpose: 

This function changes the mixing parameters for the specified voice. 



Input: 

ULONG handle 

Handle that specifies which voice is to be influenced. 

UBYTE vol 

New volume to be used. 

UBYTE pan 

New panning to be used. 

UBYTE span 

New surround panning to be used. 

UBYTE fxvol 

New FX (AUX) volume to be used. 

Output: 

Returns TRUE if the parameters were set successfully, FALSE 
otherwise. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 341 



08/25/99 



Mu$yK Audio Tools 

VOICE_GET_TIME 



float voice_get__t ime (ULONG handle, float *total time) 



Purpose: 

Returns information on both, total playing time and current time into 
playback of the MORT sample playing on the specified voice. This 
information can be used to synchronize other events to the MORT 
sample’s playback (e.g. subtitles). 



Input: 

ULONG handle 

Handle that specifies which voice’s info structure is to be accessed. 
float *total_time 

Pointer to a float that will receive the total playing time of the MORT 
sample active on this voice, in seconds. 



Output: 

The function returns the current duration of the sample playback on the 
specified voice in seconds or zero if not successful. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 3: 342 




N64 Programmers Reference 



VOICE_SYNC_IDLE 



void voice_sync__idle (void) 



Purpose: 

Stalls until all activity in the voice library and MORT has ended. No 
voices will be stopped explicitly. 



Input: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 3: 343 



08/25/99 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



APPENDIX 4 - Game Boy 

Programmers Reference 

Table of Contents: 

tAusyX's Basic Architecture 347 

Performance impact on the Game Application. 348 

Memory impact on the Game Application 349 

Requirements for the Game Application. 350 

LinkingMmyX Object Files to Your Application. 357 

APPENDIX 4.7 - Game Boy Data Conversion Tools. ...353 

What is Data Conversion? 353 

MUCONV.EXE 354 

GM2S0NG.EXE 359 

APPENDIX 4.2 - Function Section. 360 

sndjnit 361 

snd_Exit 362 

snd_Silence 363 

snd_Handle 364 

snd_StartSong 365 

snd_StopSong 366 

snd_PauseSong 367 

snd_ResumeSong 368 

snd_SongActive 369 

snd_ChangeSongSpeed 370 

snd_SetSongVolume 371 

snd_GetStateSize 372 

snd_SaveState ..,.373 

snd_RestoreState 374 

snd_StartSFX 375 

snd_StopSFX 376 

snd_SetSFXVolume 377 

snd_StartSample 378 

snd_StopSample 379 

snd_DoSample 380 

snd_PlaySample. 381 

snd_CheckFlag 382 

snd_SetMasterVolume 383 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 4: 345 



M JSyX A uc jj 0 Tools 



Appendix 4.3 - Mini-MORT Samples, 



384 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 346 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



Musyas Basic Architecture 

In every sound system there is but one central element, the instrument or 
sound effect (depending upon whether you are talking music or effects). 
MusyK does not really differentiate between the two, so we will use the 
general term Sound throughout this manual. 

In MusyK a sound actually represents a small, tokenized program that is 
executed at run time. This allows the sound designer more control over 
the produced sound. 

As mentioned before there are two basic types of any kind of sound 
reproduction within Musyk. Instruments are used in the context of a 
piece of music, called a song. Each song has its own unique ID 
associated with it, which identifies the song when the programmer 
decides to start it. 

Sound effects are also accessed using an automatically generated 
unique sound effect ID. 

All IDs are hidden behind symbolic names so no changes to the program 
are required if an ID has changed. 

All data, songs and sounds are collected into one larger project file, 
which needs to be included in the application. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 4: 347 




Audio Tools 



Performance Impact on the Game Application 



Musya has been designed to offer a maximum of flexibility, at an 
acceptable CPU performance impact. 

This impact varies depending on the features the musician utilizes in his 
or her small sound programs, since some features are slightly more 
complex than others. 

It is also a question of whether or not it is possible to use Musya's built- 
in capabilities for sample playback in music. Samples for use in music 
come in two flavors, low and normal quality. Their difference is sampling 
rate. Low quality samples play back at 1920Hz and normal quality at 
8192Hz. To make use of the normal quality, the game application must 
not make use of the timer interrupt. This interrupt will be used solely by 
Musya, should you allow for samples of normal quality. 

If you cannot spare the timer interrupt, the musician will need to resort to 
the low quality samples. These are still good enough for most drums. 

You will need to coordinate this issue with the musician beforehand. 

Finally, performance is naturally better when you write your game in 
dedicated Game Boy Color format, since it offers twice the speed of the 
conventional Game Boy. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 348 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



Memory Impact on the Game Application 



MusyA requires exactly 256 bytes of memory for operation. 

There is no requirement concerning placement or alignment, but for 
simplicity we have decided to let it take the last 256 bytes ranging from 
SdfOO-Sdfff. 

This will allow you to get the most out of the internal RAM on Game Boy 
Color, since it is permissable to have the RAM area in the bank switching 
RAM area of Game Boy Color. Before making any calls to Mu$/& 
however, you will need to make sure that the correct RAM bank has 
been selected. 

For regular Game Boy applications, the top of RAM is also a good 
choice. It normally requires little change in your program, since most 
programmers keep their stack there, and this is easily moved from $dfff 
to $deff. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 349 



08/25/99 



fJtiSj/A Audio Tools 



Requirements for the Game Application 



Musya assumes that its core routines have been linked into their own 
bank at an offset of $4000 (start of the switchable bank). 

Musya assumes that it will be called once from within every vertical 
blank interrupt, to process all its handling and updating tasks. 

Musya assumes that all calls to its API are made from within the 
vertical blank interrupt, or with interrupts disabled. 

To guarantee the best possible timing, you should call the service 
function right after any updates to the Video RAM and before any game 
logic. 

If normal quality samples are used in any song, the game will have to 
provide a timer interrupt handler that calls a second service function of 
Musya on every timer interrupt. Also, the game needs to allow for 
interrupt nesting to service the timer interrupts immediately, when they 
occur. Failure to do so will impact the quality of the samples. 

After a timer interrupt, the game cannot assume that the ROM bank is 
configured as it was prior to the interrupt. It is the responsibility of the 
application to restore its own bank configuration. (This is because 
Musya cannot determine the current bank configurations.) 

If normal quality samples are used in any song, the game is not allowed 
to switch between single and double speed mode on Game Boy Color. 

It will need to select one speed to generally run in and then not switch 
back and forth as long as a song or effect is playing. This will render the 
HALT instruction inoperable when running in double speed mode, but 
there is no alternative. (This is because the timer interrupt is curiously 
affected by the CPU speed as well.) Failure to do so will impact the 
quality of the samples. 

Before calling any Musya function, the game needs to setup the correct 
ROM and RAM banks. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 350 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



Linking Musy& Object Files to Your Application 



Before you can make use of MusyK in your application, you need to link 
the supplied object files to it. The object files are in the ISAS object 
format and can be linked only with ISLK (which are used by the official 
Nintendo development system for each product). 

Since both ISAS and ISLK are a bit inflexible when it comes to assigning 
addresses and the link order of modules, we have provided the object file 
containing code for Bank 0 in two different versions. 

After installing the example from the MusyK package, there will be three 
object files. 

musyx.o 

This contains the main code of the Mus/X synthesizer and 
sequencer. It needs to be linked into an otherwise empty code 
bank. To define the bank and the offset (preferably $4000) for 
this module, you enter the following to your linker call: 

-G MUSYX=$BBXXXX musyx.o 

where B specifies the bank number and XXXX the offset 
(i.e., $104000) 

musyxbO.o 

This file contains service code for Musy& which needs to be 
located in the common ROM Bank 0. The group name for this 
module is MUSYXB0 and you need to manually assign an ORG 
address for it on the command line (see musyx.o). Because this is 
not an easy task for Bank 0 we have provided an alternate service 
code file. 

musyxbankOO.o 

This is essentially the same as musyxbO.o, but the group name for 
this module is BANK00, which we figure is the same name as what 
you will be calling your bank 0. Because of this, you do not need to 
supply an absolute ORG address for this module on the linker 
command line. It will be located somewhere in bank 0 at a yet 
unused address. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 351 



08/25/99 




JVI USyX Audio Tools 



(Please note that all three object files also exist in a subdirectory named 
'CapsOff'. If you are using case-sensitive symbols in your application, 
you might want to use the object files in the 'CapsOff' directory.) 

The current version of the service module, which you need to link to 
bank 0 requires $550 (or 1360 bytes) of free space. If you do not have 
enough room in bank 0 to accommodate the service module, we suggest 
moving some of your code from bank 0 to another bank. 

You will also need to specify a target address for the MUSYX_DATA 
group which will contain the actual converted project data. The 
MUSYX_DATA group must be assigned the next bank after the MUSYX 
group with an offset of $4000. Otherwise, it is very likely that any call to 
MusyK will cause a crash. 

Here's an example of how to do this. 

(We assume that the source code created during the data conversion 
process, which includes the binary project data, was called sounddata.s 
(and therefore assembled to sounddata.o)). 

islk -G MUSYX=$44000 musyx.o -G MUSYX_DATA=$54000 
sounddata.o -G MUSYXB0=$03ab0 musyxbO.o 

Note that the command line in the above example uses the musyxbO.o 
module and assigns the address $3ab0 to it, which is the highest 
possible address in bank 0 which will hold the $550 byte long service 
module. If you will be using musyxbO.o instead of musyxbankOO.o, we 
recommend using this technique, as it will relieve you of keeping track of 
'the next best' bank 0 address. 

Please refer to the supplied sample code for further information. 

If you are using OPUS make and MKMF, you can actually use the 
supplied make file after you have made the appropriate changes for the 
path names at the top of it. 

We have also supplied the GNU make utility and a suitable GNU 
makefile (invoked by the make.bat batch file). 

If you're not using makefiles at all, please refer to the makeme.bat batch 
file. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 352 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



APPENDIX 4.1 - Game Boy 

Data Conversion Tools 

What is Data Conversion? 



Data conversion, is the process in which the sound project created with 
the Musyk editor is processed into a suitable format for the target 
machine. This process involves converting the actual MusyK project 
itself, all related samples and the MIDI sequences. 

There are two different processes of converting the project data, 
depending upon whether data is needed for the game application itself, 
or as sample data for the sound slave. 

Data suitable for implementation into the game application is usually 
converted from the MusyX. project into the final target format by the 
application programmer, since he needs to import this data into the 
application. 

Sample data to be used as add-on ROM samples for the sound slave, 
during creation of the sound, can be created by the musician himself 
using a simple GUI driven tool. The data this tool creates needs to be 
programmed onto a flash ROM. if you have no access to a Flash ROM 
Gang Writer, this will be the only time where the application programmer 
might need to be involved, to kindly flash the ROM using his 
development system. 

To convert a MusyK project into either kind of data, a number of 
command line based tools are employed. This also applies to Windows 
GUI applications, which will invoke those tools to get the job done. 
Naturally, this requires that those tools are installed on your machine by 
the installation program (which is the default). 

The following pages describe the purpose and use of all tools needed to 
produce all necessary data files. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 353 



08/25/99 




MiJSyJl. Audio Tools 

MUCONV.EXE 



MUConv is a command line driven tool which will convert a MusyK 
project into a final target platform data file. During its conversion process, 
MUConv will, in turn, call GM2SONG a number of times to convert the 
MIDI sequences into the target format. You need to make sure that 
MUConv can locate GM2SONG, otherwise the conversion process will 
fail. 

The output created by MUConv consists of a number of files, three of 
which are to be included in the game application. More on this later. 

Command Line Parameters 

MUCONV.EXE expects the following command line. 

MUCONV [Options] <Export script> <Descript ion> 

Export Script: 

This is the filename of the export script the musician created from within 
the Musy& editor (Menu: Project->Generate scriptfile for export). This file 
describes the MusyK project in a manner MUConv can understand. 
Actually, you may specify more than one export script here, separated by 
spaces. These will be merged together. For Game Boy development 
however, we do not suspect that you will ever need to do this. 

Description: 

This is a file the application programmer has to provide. The contents of 
this file list which groups contained in the MusyX. project need to be 
included in the final data file. It also provides information concerning 
where the final data files should be created. See below for details. 

Options: 

-a 

This option tells MUConv to create an include file suitable for assembly 
language, rather than C. When Game Boy is specified as the target 
platform, this will be the default. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 354 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



-b 

This option will create a data file suitable for systems using big endian 
byte order, rather than little endian (the default). For the Game Boy 
platform this option has no effect. 

-p <path> 

If the tool is not invoked from the project directory itself, you may use this 
option to specify a search path for referencing all files from the project. 
This may be useful if you specify more than one project to be jointly 
converted. This option may be used multiple times, to add a search path 
to the search path list. 

-t <system> 

This option will select the target platform for which to convert the project. 
Possible systems are: 

N64 

Game Boy 



-s 

This option disables the processing of samples, to speed up the 
conversion process, when the samples have not changed. 

This option has no effect for Game Boy. 

-d 

This option will force all samples to be converted to the default format for 
the target platform, overriding the musician's specifications. 

This option has no effect for Game Boy. 

-v 

This option enables the verbose mode. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 4: 355 




Audio Tools 



Description File 

The description file is a text file containing several sections that tell 
MUConv what portions of the MusyK project to include in the target data 
file. It also tells MUConv the location and base name of the data files to 
create, and what to call the automatically created include file for all 
assigned IDs. 

A general description file has the following layout. 

[Pool] 

[Samples] 

[Pro j ect ] 

[Output Directory] 

[Name] 

[Include] 



Before you can successfully convert a project, you need to fill in the 
blanks. 

[Pool] 

This section lists all group names (case sensitive!), which contribute their 
macros to the final project data. List one group per line. 

[Samples] 

This section lists all group names (case sensitive!), from which 
referenced samples will be taken into the final project data. List one 
group per line. 

[Project] 

This section lists all group names (case sensitive!), from which 
information about MIDI sequences and MIDI setups are taken into the 
final project data. List one group per line here, as well. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 356 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



[OutputDirectory] 

This section contains only one entry, which is the name of the directory 
into which all final data files will be written. The directory must exist in 
advance, otherwise MUConv will fail. 

[Name] 

This section contains only one entry, which is the base name (without 
extension) for all final data files in the output directory. All created output 
files share the same base name, but different extensions will be 
appended, according to the type of data written. 

[Include] 

This final section specifies the file name (with extension) of the include 
file to be written, which will contain all IDs for the songs and sound 
effects. For assembly type output, the extension for this name is usually 
.i (for C-type output .h). 



/ For Game Boy projects, you should list the same groups in every 
section (see example below). 



Description File Example 

[Pool] 

Songgroup 

SFX 

[Samples] 

Songgroup 

SFX 

[Pro j ect ] 
Songgroup 
SFX 

[OutputDirectory] 

output 

[Name] 

Game Sound 
[Include] 

SoundIDs . i 



© 1 999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 4: 357 



Audio Tools 



Output Files 

After a successful conversion process, MUConv will have created a 
number of files in the specified output directory. 

Three files will be named according to the base name you specified in 
the description file with added suffixes. The include file containing all IDs, 
will have been created under the full name you gave in the description 
file. 

Taking the above example, MUConv will have created the following 4 
files. 

output \GameSound . pool 
output \GameSound . pro j 
output \GameSound . s 
output \SoundIDs . i 



.pool files 

The data in these files contain all converted samples and MIDI 
sequences. It needs to be included in your application, starting in the 
ROM bank right after the MusyK sound routine. 



.proj files 

These files contain converted project data, such as sound macros and 
ADSR curves. This file needs to be included in your application, in the 
same bank as the MusVA sound routine. 



.s files 

This file is source code that you can add to your application, to include 
both the. pool and .proj files more easily. 



include files 

This file is source code that contains symbolic names for all sound 
effects and songs in the MusyX. project. Since the numeric 
representation of these are likely to change when changes to the sound 
project are made, you should always reference an object by its symbolic 
name. This requires that you set up a dependency to this file in all your 
application source codes that deal with sound. 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 358 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



Please refer to the supplied example application, for a detailed 
demonstration which illustrates how to include the data files into your 
own application. 



GM2SONG.EXE 



GM2SONG.EXE is a command line based tool, which converts a 
MIDI-1 sequencer file into a proprietary file format, used by the runtime 
library of MusyK. 

Since this tool is invoked by MUCONV.EXE, we will not explain it's 
stand-alone usage here. 

You need to make sure, however, that GM2SONG.EXE can be found by 
MUCONV.EXE. You can ensure this by either placing it in your search 
path, or by having it in the same directory that you are in when you start 
MUCONV.EXE. ~ 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 359 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



APPENDIX 4.2 - Function Section 

The Musyk API consists of several functions that the application can call 
to do things like starting/pausing/resuming a song, starting sound effects 
and similar services. 

The following pages contain a description for every API function, 
including what they do, what parameters they expect and what they 
return. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 360 



Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd Init 



Purpose: 

This function needs to be called once, during the initialization phase of 
your application. It will setup all internal structures and variables of 
Musya. You must call this function to make sound. 



Inputs: 

A Bit 0: Set when running on Game Boy Color. Clear if not. 
Bit 7: Set when the flash ROM is for Game Boy Color 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

There are two distinctions you need to make before calling this routine. 

• Are you currently running on Game Boy Color? 

» Is the flash ROM enabling Game Boy Color? 

For instance, you could be writing a program that does not require the 
Game Boy Color features, at all. In this case you would not have the 
CGB compatibility flag set in the ROM registration area, and Game Boy 
Color would behave like a conventional Game Boy. So all Game Boy 
Color features, such as double speed mode, do not function. But still this 
flash ROM can be plugged into Game Boy Color. This needs to be 
communicated to Musya. 



So: 




A = 


$81 


A = 


$80 


A = 


$01 


A = 


$00 



Running a Game Boy Color game on Game Boy Color 
Running a Game Boy Color game on Game Boy 
(not permissable) 

Running a conventional game on Game Boy Color 
Running a conventional game on Game Boy 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 361 



08/25/99 




Audio Tools 



snd_Exit 

Purpose: 

This function immediately stops all sounds and disables Atit/syK. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

After calling snd_Exit, you will need to call sndjnit aqain, prior to any 
other API call. 



See also: 

snd Silence 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 362 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_Silence 

Purpose: 

This function will immediately stop all sounds and any active song, but 
will leave MusyX in an active state. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_Exit 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 363 



08/25/99 



MW0M Audio Tools 



snd_Handle 



Purpose: 

This function needs to be called once every vertical blank interrupt. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

To ensure the best possible timing for samples and songs, call this 
function as soon as possible in vertical blank. This assumes that all tasks 
you do before calling this function will take approximately the same time, 
every interrupt. 

You will also need to allow interrupt nesting (see Game Boy 
Development Manual, Revision G, "CPU Control Register") right before 
calling this function, if you are utilizing normal quality samples. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 364 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_StartSong 

Purpose: 

This function will start song playback. 



Inputs: 

A ID of the song to start 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

The ID you need to pass to this function was created by MUCONV.exe 
when you converted the project. Please use only the symbolic names 
assigned by MUCONV, as the numeric values behind them are likely to 
change when you convert the project again. 



See also: 

snd_StopSong, snd_PauseSong, snd_ResumeSong, 
snd_ChangeSongSpeed, snd_SetSongVolume 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 365 



08/25/99 



Mi tSyX Audio Tools 



snd_StopSong 



Purpose: 

This function will stop any song that is currently playing. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

The song is stopped immediately, and cannot be resumed. It will need to 
be started again by calling snd_StartSong. 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_PauseSong, snd_ResumeSong, 
snd_ChangeSongSpeed, snd_SetSongVolume 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 366 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_PauseSong 



Purpose: 

This function will pause a song that is currently playing. It can be 
resumed at a later time, by calling snd_ResumeSong. You can also save 
the state of a paused song into a user supplied buffer and play another 
song. Then, restore the buffered state and resume the first song (to play 
a jingle for instance), by calling the state functions snd_GetStateSize, 
snd_SaveState and snd_RestoreState. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_StopSong, snd_ResumeSong, 
snd_ChangeSongSpeed, snd_SetSongVolume, 
snd_GetStateSize, snd_SaveState and snd_RestoreState 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 367 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



snd_ResumeSong 



Purpose: 

This function will resume a song that was paused. You can also save the 
state of a paused song into a user supplied buffer and play another song. 
Then, restore the buffered state and resume the first song (to play a 
jingle for instance), by calling the state functions snd_GetStateSize, 
snd_SaveState and snd_RestoreState. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_StopSong, snd_PauseSong, 
snd_ChangeSongSpeed, snd_SetSongVolume 
snd_GetStateSize, snd_SaveState and snd_RestoreState 



08 / 25/99 



Appendix 4: 368 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_SongAetive 



Purpose: 

This function will return whether or not a song is currently playing. 
The main use of this function, is to determine the end of a 'one-shot' 
song, like a jingle. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

A 0 = Not playing, 1 = playing 
ZF 0 = Playing, 1 = not playing 



Remarks: 

The song itself, is certain to be at its end, when this function tells you that 
no song is playing. This does not necessarily mean that no further sound 
can be heard, since the sound macro has control over the sound. If a 
note is fading out, the song will have been finished, and you could 
prematurely end the sound synthesis. The musician should make sure 
that, in case of a 'one-shot' song, the last note is not a note, but a 
dummy program change that allows all notes sufficient time to really fade 
out. 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_StopSong, snd_PauseSong, snd_ResumeSong 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 369 



08/25/99 




- Audio Tools 



snd_ChangeSongSpeed 



Purpose: 

This function will change the play back speed of the currently playing 
song. This can be used for instance, in a game to indicate that time is 
running out. 



inputs: 

BC Speed scale factor based on $0100 being 1.0. 

If zero is passed, the song's default speed is restored. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

To speed the song up by 50%, set BC to $0180. To undo the 50% speed 
increase, set BC to $00ab (not $0080). 

Example: 

• current speed = $0100 

© snd_ChangeSongSpeed with $0180 yields $0180 as new speed 

• snd_ChangeSongSpeed with $0080 would yield $00c0, which is half 
of $0180. To get back to $0100, you need to specify 
($0100/$0180)«8, or $00ab for this example. 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_StopSong, snd_PauseSong, 
snd_ResumeSong, snd_SetSongVolume 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 370 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_SetSongVolume 



Purpose: 

This function sets a new master volume for the playback of a song. 
Sound effects are not affected. 



Inputs: 

A New master volume (0-15) 



Output: 

A Previous master volume 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_StartSong, snd_StopSong, snd__PauseSong, 
snd_ResumeSong, snd_ChangeSongSpeed 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 371 



08/25/99 



MusyX Audio Tools 



snd GetStateSize 



Purpose: 

This function returns the size of the buffer you need, to provide in calls to 
the functions snd_SaveState and snd_RestoreState. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

A Size, in bytes, of the state buffer 



Remarks: 

Call this function just once, during the course of your game development. 
Once you have determined the size of the buffer for this particular 
version of you do not need to do it again. 



See also: 

snd_SaveState, snd_RestoreState 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 372 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd SaveState 



Purpose: 

This function will backup the current state of the sequencer, for a paused 
song. After the state is secured, you can play another song (i.e., a jingle), 
then restore the state and resume the original song. 



Inputs: 

C Size of the user state buffer (for verification purposes) 
HL Address of the user state buffer to store the state in 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd GetStateSize, snd 



RestoreState 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 373 



08/25/99 



■■■ Audio Tools 



snd RestoreState 



Purpose: 

This function will restore a previously buffered sequencer song state. 



Inputs: 

C Size of the user state buffer (for verification purposes) 

HL Address of the user state buffer to restore the state from 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_GetStateSize, snd_SaveState 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 374 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd StartSFX 



Purpose: 

This function will start a sound effect. 



Inputs: 

A I D of the effect to start 
B Volume (0-15, or 255 for default) 

C Position (0=left, 1=center, 2=right) 



Output: 

A Active ID, or 0 if effect could not be started 



Remarks: 

The ID returned by this function, if not zero, is a handle for this sound 
effect. You need to keep it for a later call to snd_StopSFX. 



See also: 

snd_StopSFX, snd_SetSFXVolume 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 375 



08/25/99 



hsiJSyJ* Audio Tools 



snd_StopSFX 

Purpose: 

This function will stop a sound effect, previously started by 
snd_StartSFX. 



Inputs: 

A Active ID returned by snd_StartSFX 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

The ID returned by snd_StartSFX, will remain unique, as long as no 
other sound effect cancels this one due to a higher priority. In this 
particular case the ID you kept will become invalid, and might cancel 
another soundeffect that has received this ID assignment, in the 
meantime. 

For one-shot sound effects, this is not a problem, since you need not 
stop them, explicitly. For permanent effects however, this could be an 
issue, which is best solved by having the sound designer assign 
appropriate priorities to the sound effects, to minimize these 
occurrences. 



See also: 

snd_StartSFX, snd_SetSFXVolume 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 376 





Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd SetSFXVolume 



Purpose: 

This function sets a new master volume for the sound effects. 
The volume of a song remains unaffected. 



Inputs: 

A New master volume (0-15) 



Output: 

A Previous master volume 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_StartSFX, snd_StopSFX 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 377 



08/25/99 



NkMfJL Audio Tools 



snd_StartSample 

Purpose: 

This function will start the playback of a normal quality sample. 



Inputs: 

A ROM bank number of the sample to play back 
HL ROM address of the sample to play back 
BC Length of the sample / 16 

DE BankO address of a callback to call when sample ends 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

The sample cannot be longer than 1 MByte. This function requires the 
availability of the timer interrupt. The sample address needs to be 
aligned to 16 byte boundaries. 



See also: 

snd_StopSample, snd_PlaySample, snd_DoSample 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 378 






Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_StopSample 

Purpose: 

This function will stop a sample being played back. 



Inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 



See also: 

snd_StartSample, snd_PlaySample, snd_DoSample 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 379 



08/25/99 



MusyX Audio Tools 



sncl_DoSample 

Purpose: 

This function needs to be called, when the timer interrupt occurs. 



inputs: 

None. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

To insure good quality of the sample, you need to respond to the 
occurrence of the timer interrupt the moment it occurs. To do this, you 
will need to allow for interrupt nesting. Please refer to the Game Boy 
Development Manual, "CPU Control Register" for details. 



See also: 

snd_StartSample, snd_StopSample, snd_PlaySample 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 380 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_PlaySample 



Purpose: 

This function suspends MusyK, stops all sound output, then plays back a 
high quality sample using all CPU power. When playback is completed, it 
resumes MusyA and your application program. 



Inputs: 

A ROM bank number of the sample to play back 
HL ROM address of the sample to play back 
BC Length of the sample / 16 
E Bit mask for the buttons A, B, SELECT and START. 



Output: 

None. 



Remarks: 

The bitmask you supply, identifies one or more buttons that can cancel 
playback of the sample. This is required, because no interrupts occur 
during playback, and your application is suspended, as well. 

The sample cannot be longer than 1 MByte. 

The sample start address needs to be aligned on a 16 byte boundary. 



See also: 

snd_StartSample, snd_StopSample, snd_DoSample 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 381 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



snd_CheckFlag 



Purpose: 

Checks if a user flag, triggered by a sound, is set. This enables limited 
signaling capabilities from AU/syK to your application program. When a 
flag is set, it remains set until this function is called. It's state will be 
returned, and the flag will then be cleared. 



Inputs: 

A Flag number to test for (0-7) 



Output: 

A State of the flag 

ZF State of the flag (zero or not zero) 



Remarks: 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 382 




Game Boy Programmers Reference 



snd_SetMasterVolume 

Purpose: 

This function is used to set a new master volume in the final mixing 
circuit. It does affect both sound effects and music. 



Inputs: 

A New master volume (0-7) 



Output: 

Previous master volume. 



Remarks: 

This setting works together with the snd_SetSFXVolume and 
snd_SetSongVolume. It acts as a final volume scaler. 



See also: 

snd_SetSFXVolume, snd_SetSongVolume 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 4: 383 



08/25/99 



Audio Tools 



Appendix 4.3 - Mini-MORT Samples 

The samples you can play back, using the functions 'snd_PlaySample' 
and 'snd_StartSample', are "Mini-MORT" samples. 

MORT is our proprietary compressed sample format, and the 'Mini' 
derivative of it is used for small platforms, like Game Boy. 

You can create Mini-MORT samples with the supplied Mini-MORT 
editing tools, from 16 bit mono samples in WAV or AIFF format. 

The only sampling rate supported by Game Boy is 8192 Hz, so your 
input samples should be sampled at this rate. No resampling is done in 
the Mini-MORT editor, so converting a sample of a different rate is likely 
to yield an undesirable result when played back on the actual Game Boy. 

A sample written by the Mini-MORT editor cannot be imported into Game 
Boy directly. You will need to remove the header of this file, manually, 
when you build your data resources for Game Boy. 

This file header, as of version 1 MORT files, is 44 (or $2e) bytes in size. 
To verify that the file you are processing is a MORT file, verify the 
contents of the first 8 bytes of the header and compare to the values 
listed below. 

0x00: DB "MORT" 

0x04: DW 0 

0x06: DW Version (little endian) 

To verify that the file is in Mini-MORT format, check the bytes at offset 8 
in the header. 

0x08: DW 1 (little endian) 

If this 1 6 bit value does not contain the value 1 , then this file is not in 
Mini-MORT format and therefore cannot be used on Game Boy. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 4: 384 




Slave Reverb Control (N64) 



APPENDIX 5 - Slave Reverb Control (N64) 

Table of Contents: 

The Reverb Effects Engine (REE) on the N64 387 

REE Structure 387 

Performance Issues 388 

How to Use the Reverb Panel 389 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 08/25/99 

Appendix 5: 385 




08 / 25/99 



Appendix 5: 386 




Slave Reverb Control (N64) 



The Reverb Effects Engine (REE) on the N64 

REE Structure 

The schematic below, is a structural overview of the N64 reverb effects 
engine. 



In 




Out 



The incoming data is written into the delay buffer at the current write 
position. Next, up to eight reflections are processed by accumulating the 
data from the different offsets in the delay buffer, after scaling the 
different reflections with their specific volumes. 

The accumulated signal is then mixed into the dry part of the output 
signal. At the same time, it is passed through a 4 point FIR filter, scaled 
with the feedback volume and added to the input signal, written earlier to 
the current delay buffer write position. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



Appendix 5: 387 



08/25/99 








Audio Tools 



Performance issues 

The N64 implementation of REE supports up to eight reflections. When 

using the engine, keep in mind that resources on the N64 are limited. 

While great care as been taken to keep the performance hit as small as 

possible on the implementation side of things, there are some “rules” that 

can be used to minimize the impact, by the way the system is used. 

• Each reflection produces additional work for the RSP. It’s generally a 
good idea to use the smallest possible number of reflections to 
achieve a certain effect. 

• When reflections are spread out over a wide range of delay times, 
this will have a larger impact on the overall performance, than the 
same number of reflections within a smaller range. 

• Do not set the feedback volume to large values. The REE engine 
does not protect you against feedback signal amplitudes that are too 
high. These can cause the output signal to be distorted. 

• The delay buffer will cost main RAM space. At 22.05 KHz 1000ms of 
buffer space will cost about 43 Kbytes of RAM. 

• REE will align the specified delay buffer size to the next higher 
number of samples that can be divided by 192. So, you may not be 
able to specify the exact buffer length you want. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 5: 388 





Slave Reverb Control (N64 




How to Use the Reverb Panel 

The parameters that can be influenced using the reverb control panel, 
are directly mapped to the parameters in the reverb schematic from the 
last section. This is described in the following paragraphs. 



Retlectioi 



Feedback volume 



To use the parameters, adjust the values as you see fit and press the 
update button. Keep in mind that you will have to do this each time you 
change any values, otherwise the old values will still be used. This is true 
for all settings, including the enable switch and the selection of different 
setup sets. 



You may define up to 16 different setup sets at any one time. This limit is 
only imposed by the slave program. At runtime, the number of different 
settings that can be used is not limited at all by the system. These setup 
sets are only introduced to allow the musician and/or SFX designer to 
test different REE setups quickly. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



08/25/99 



Appendix 5: 389 



Mu$yy„ Audio Tools 



The export button will bring up a file selector dialog box, that allows 
specifying the name of an ASCII text file that will contain all current 
parameters of the reverb panel, for easy access by the programmer. 



08/25/99 



Appendix 5: 390 





Mini- 1 .a.R.T. 

Advanced Sample Optimize Editor 



© 1999 Factor 5 LLC 



391 




General Information 



General Information 

What is Mini-M.O.R.T.? 

Mini-M.O.R.T. is a subset of the M.O.R.T. sample compression system, 
specifically designed for smaller platforms (like Game Boy) that cannot 
deal with the required computations of the large M.O.R.T. system. 
Mini-M.O.R.T. has also stricter requirements for the input format of 
samples, which is based on the limitations of the target platform. 

The normal compression ratio is about 4:1 . This can be increased to 
about 7:1 with manual adjustments. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



393 



MINI-M.O.R.T. 



M.O.R.T. File Formats 

Source Sample Format 

The Mini-M.O.R.T. editor can load samples in WAV format. Basically any 
sample processing software you use to create samples should be able to 
write in this format. 

However, any sample you wish to encode into a Mini-M.O.R.T. sample 
needs to be a 16 bit mono audio file. If it is not in this format, the editor 
will refuse to load it. 

Samples should have a sample rate of either 1920 Hz or 8192 Hz. The 
editor can load samples of any rate, but it bases its mode of operation on 
a sample rate of 4000Hz. Any sample below this rate will be treated as 
"low" quality, all others as "normal" and "high" quality. 

Regardless of the sample rate you load into the editor, Game Boy can 
play back only at 1920 Hz and 8192 Hz. It chooses the appropriate 
frequency based on the "low" or "normal/high" setting. This means that 
samples will not sound correct if they were not sampled in one of the two 
supported sampling rates. 



MIF (M.O.R.T. Information File) 

The MIF File is written by the editor, and contains sample processing 
information for the sample you edited. This file is useful if you have 
already applied Mini-M.O.R.T. compression information on a sample, but 
need to make changes to the original wave file. 

Change the Wave File as desired and load it into the Mini-M.O.R.T. 
editor. Then press the ‘Reload MIF’-button. If you saved the MIF File the 
first time, you will find all your blocks optimized, after you have applied 
the MIF-data to the voice-file. For this to work as intended it is a 
requirement that you do not change the overall length of your sample 
(like changing pitch, cutting sections from it, etc.), or otherwise you will 
end up with the information stored in the MIF file at blocks where they do 
not belong to. 



08 / 25/99 



394 





Blocks, Curves, and Easy Optimize 



Blocks, Curves and Easy Optimize 

General 

A Mini-M.O.R.T.-file is divided into blocks of 32 samples each. 

The actual voice compression scans each block and compresses it. You 
can increase the compression ratio by marking some blocks as ‘Empty’ 
(visualized as a green block). 

If at least two consecutive blocks are marked empty, the Mini-M.O.R.T. 
voice compression will disregard these blocks and insert zero-data. 

To mark a block ‘empty’, it is necessary that the previous block ends on 
zero and the next block starts on zero, to assure a smooth playback. To 
achieve this, you can choose from three different curves that are used to 
fade the previous block out and the next block in. Remember, these 
curved blocks (yellow, orange and pink depending on the applied fading 
curve) are not empty and cannot be used to increase the compression 
ratio. 

The Easy Optimize section will help you find empty blocks and mark 
them empty. You can adjust the threshold (1-32767) of this ‘Noise-Gate’- 
algorithm. When the Optimize-button is used, the tool will mark all those 
blocks whose amplitudes stay within the threshold range as empty. 

To manually mark any block as empty you need to click on it with the left 
mouse button. If you want to remove this empty mark, select it with the 
right mouse button and choose "Free” to restore the original data. 

The Mini-M.O.R.T. editor will load samples of any rate, but it bases its 
mode of operation (sample quality) at a rate of 4000Hz. Any sample with 
a lower rate is considered to be of "low" quality. All other samples will 
enable the "normal" and "high" quality settings. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



395 




General Functions 



Open / Open New 

Opens a new .WAV sample for editing. Please examine the previous 
table for details on sampling rates. 



Save / Save As 

Saves the sample file. Because of the non-destructive nature of the Mini- 
M.O.R.T. Editor, saving your source sample is not necessary. The 
exception to this is when you are in the Mini-M.O.R.T preview mode, and 
want to save the generated Mini-M.O.R.T. file as a demonstration. 




his will 



play the 



entire voice file from the beginning of the file. 




This will play the 



voice file from the current position. 




his will stop playback of the voice file. 



Original / MORI 

With these functions, you can switch between the original voice file and 
an encoded Mini-M.O.R.T. file for preview purposes. This shows you the 
difference in sound between the Mini-M.O.R.T. file and the oriqinal wave 
file. 



Save MIF 

Saves the MIF file (M.O.R.T. Information File). 



Do MIF 

Applies the MIF data to the voice file. Use this with the "Free All" 
command to get an A/B comparison with the original voice file and your 
optimizations. 



08 / 25/99 



396 





General Functions 



Free All 

Sets all blocks free, so you can get the original status of the file. Use this 
with the ‘Do MIF’ command, to get an A/B compare with the original 
voice file and your optimizations. 



Reload MIF 

Loads the matching MIF file for the opened voice file. This function is not 
available if you have not saved a MIF file for this voice file before. 



Reload WAV 

Reloads the wave file. This is a useful feature that enables you to hear 
how your changes to the wave file affect the Mini-M.O.R.T. voice 
compression. 



Save MORT 

Saves your final Mini-M.O.R.T file. After using “Save MORT”, it is not 
possible to change anything in the .mort file. It can not be loaded Into 
the Mini-M.O.R.T. editor again. 



About 

Shows the copyright Information. 



Help 

Not implemented. 



Exit 

Exits the editor. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



397 



MMI-M.O.R.T. 



Statistics 

Encode 

This will test-encode your file and give you information about the 
compressed file size and the compression factor. 

The "Noise Filter" checkbox right below the "Encode" button enables a 
special noise filter for Game Boy samples. It may or may not increase 
the quality of normal and high quality samples. 

You should try A/B comparisons of an encoded sample with this filter 
turned on and off to see if the current sample sounds better with this filter 
enabled. 



Comp. Size 

Is the file size of the compressed Mini-M.O.R.T. file in bytes. 



Comp. Factor 

Is the compression ratio, as compared to the original file size. 



Filelength 

Is the length of the original wave file in samples. 



Rate 

Sample Rate of the wave file. 

NOTE: Either 1920 Hz or 8192 Hz are supported on the Game Boy. 

Mode 

Shows the amount of channels in the original wave file. 

NOTE: Mini-M.O.R.T. only supports MONO files with one channel. 

Bits 

Shows the resolution of the original wave file. 

NOTE: Mini-M.O.R.T. only supports 16 bit files. 



08 / 25/99 



398 




Statistics 



Position 

Shows the start-position of the sample-window in blocks. You change the 
start position by scrolling the scrollbar, or setting a block as the new start 
position. Selecting the block with the middle mouse-key does this. This is 

helpful if you want to check a specific range of a sample with the L*. 
Button. 

Scalefactor 

This is the scaling factor you chose in the view area. 



©1999 Factor 5 LLC 



399 





View 



1:1 - Full 

With these Buttons you select a scalefactor and choose how much you 
want to zoom into or out of the Sample. 

Redraw 

Redraws the contents of the sample-window. 

Grid 

Switches the Grid on or off. 

B-Style 

Shows the sample-data in a different display style. 



08/25/99 



400 






© 1999 Nintendo of America Inc. TM, ©and the 'N logo are trademarks of Nintendo of Amenca Inc. Factors Audio Tools is a trademark of Factor 5 LLC. Distributed by Nintendo of America Inc. 


